Input begins:

        Abstract
The expansion of the penal system has been one of the most dramatic trends in contemporary American society. A wealth of research has examined the impact of incarceration on a range of later life outcomes and has considered how the penal system has emerged as a mechanism of stratification and inequality in the United States. In this article, we review the literature from a comparatively new vein of this research: the impact of incarceration on health outcomes. We first consider the impact of incarceration on a range of individual outcomes, from chronic health conditions to mortality. We then consider outcomes beyond the individual, including the health of family members and community health outcomes. Next, we discuss mechanisms linking incarceration and health outcomes before closing with a consideration of limitations in the field and directions for future research.

Keywords
incarceration, health, mortality, inequality, stress

INTRODUCTION
This article reviews the sociological literature on the effects of incarceration on health, focusing specifically on physical morbidity and mortality. During the last four decades the American penal system grew at an unprecedented rate. The incarceration rate, which was roughly stable for 50 years prior to 1975, increased approximately fivefold since 1975 (Pettit & Western 2004). More than six million US residents are now or have been incarcerated and there are over 17 million felons or ex-felons in the United States. These numbers demonstrate the massive size of the penal system, and the current felon population is approximately six times larger than it was in 1970 (Uggen et al. 2006). Although the expansion of the penal system has affected all demographic groups, the impact was most acute for disadvantaged minorities and minority communities, for which rates of incarceration are five to eight times higher than rates for similarly situated whites (Pettit & Western 2004).

The penal system grew so large and so rapidly it now draws comparisons to the American system of higher education. Each year approximately as many men graduate college as are released from prison (Knapp et al. 2008), and the size of the incarcerated population (Glaze & Parks 2012) is approximately the same as the enrollment at all American research universities (Snyder & Dillow 2010). Given this rapid expansion and the wide swath the penal system cuts through American society, some argue incarceration is now a phase in the life course for some population subgroups (Pettit & Western 2004) and that correctional policies have created a new felon class in American society (Uggen et al. 2006).

This remarkable growth produced a groundswell of research highlighting the far-reaching consequences of incarceration. For example, research illustrates the consequences of incarceration for family functioning, including the mental health of inmates' partners, the behavior of their children, and the impact of incarceration on marital dissolution (Comfort 2007, Goffman 2009, Lopoo & Western 2005, Massoglia et al. 2011, Turney et al. 2012, Western & Wildeman 2009). A related line of research reveals the stratifying impact of incarceration on economic indicators such as childhood poverty and on wages and entrance into the labor market (Pager 2003, Pager et al. 2009, Western 2002, Wildeman 2009). Scholars are becoming increasingly aware of the stratifying impact of incarceration and penal sanctions on a range of social and economic inequalities (Harris et al. 2010, Wakefield & Uggen 2010). Given that the expansion of the penal system has disproportionately impacted minorities (Pettit & Western 2004), it is important to consider whether and to what extent minorities and minority communities disproportionately feel the indirect consequences of the expansion. At least two distinct processes may drive any disproportionate impact of the penal system (Massoglia 2008b). First, as a percentage of the population many more minorities are exposed to the penal system, so even if the effect is the same across different races the aggregate impact will be larger for minority groups. Second, for a variety of reasons the detrimental consequences of incarceration could be felt more strongly by minorities. Thus, the current state of the field shows incarceration has emerged as a mechanism of stratification in American society and contributes to racial inequality.

Against this backdrop, the impact of incarceration on health outcomes and inequalities has received considerable attention, and in this article we review this body of research. We begin by discussing the general association between incarceration and individual health functioning. From there, we expand our scope and consider the impact of incarceration on family and neighborhood indicators of health. Next, we discuss the literature on the association between incarceration and mortality. Following that, we consider whether incarceration may have health benefits for some demographic groups. We then discuss the key potential sociological explanations for the relationship between incarceration and health. We conclude by discussing some of the limitations of the research on incarceration and health and then outline an agenda for future research in the incarceration–health tradition.

INCARCERATION AND MORBIDITY
Individual Health
A number of studies have examined the relationship between incarceration and a range of individual-level health outcomes. Some of the most innovative research in this area leveraged longitudinal data to examine within-person change in health status after a period of incarceration. Schnittker & John (2007), for example, focused on within-person change using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79). Three findings from this important paper set the stage for later sociological work in the area. First, the authors found that individuals with a history of incarceration report more chronic health problems after their period of incarceration than before. Second, the authors accounted for chronic health problems prior to prison, which allowed them to demonstrate empirically that incarceration is associated with a negative change in health status. Third, Schnittker & John found that the impact of the length of incarceration on health appears to be less important than the fact of incarceration itself.

Other works utilizing the same data set (NLSY) reached similar conclusions. For example, Massoglia (2008a) found that incarceration is correlated with lower self-reported health and that having been incarcerated was more consequential than the length of incarceration. Similarly, using the same data set, Massoglia (2008b) found that relative to those who had not been incarcerated, those who had been incarcerated disproportionately suffer from infectious diseases (e.g., hepatitis, tuberculosis) and stress-related illness.

Other studies looked at different aspects of health and considered the potential impact of incarceration. For example, obesity is a socially patterned epidemic with higher prevalence among those of lower socioeconomic status and among ethnic/racial minorities. For instance, Houle (2014) investigated how incarceration might contribute to patterns of obesity. The author examined trajectories of body mass index (BMI) and found that being incarcerated increases BMI. The effects varied, however, with strongest effects for blacks and for individuals with less education. In the conclusion the author echoed a common theme across many studies in the area: Given the disproportionate rates of incarceration, and the stronger effects for blacks, the penal system may condition the structure of obesity disparities across the life course (Houle 2014).1

FAMILY, NEIGHBORHOOD, AND POPULATION HEALTH
An emerging literature examines the detrimental impact of incarceration on family, neighborhood, and population health. The impact of incarceration on health, including mental health (Wildeman et al. 2012), extends to family members (including partners and children) of those who are incarcerated (Wakefield & Wildeman 2013, Wildeman & Muller 2012). Roettger & Boardman (2012) used the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health to investigate the impact of parental incarceration on childhood body mass. Using multiple analytic approaches and accounting for several potentially confounding factors such as stressful life events and individual and family characteristics, the authors found that parental incarceration is associated with increased body mass among female, but not male, children of those who were incarcerated.

Lee et al. (2014) also found that results vary by gender. Having a family member incarcerated increased the likelihood of women to experience a heart attack, stroke, or obesity or to have fair to poor health. There was no relationship found among males who had a family member incarcerated. This study revealed that the incarceration of a family member has implications for women's cardiovascular health and, consistent with other literature in the area, that incarceration contributes to overall racial disparities in health. Given the current data limitations of studying incarceration and health, this study is also notable because it utilized the National Survey of American Life, a cross-sectional, nationally representative study.

The Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study is one of the most widely used data sets to study the effects of incarceration on families (see Wildeman & Western 2010). What becomes clear from fragile families, and is relevant for understanding the health problems associated with incarceration, is that the families most likely to be affected by incarceration are often disadvantaged socially, residentially, and economically. That is, the families most likely to experience incarceration are already at risk for problematic outcomes, including poor health.

In contrast to other research that focuses on the direct effects of incarceration on health outcomes, many of the harmful effects of incarceration on children's health operate indirectly through other mechanisms, including family processes (Arditti et al. 2003, Waller & Swisher 2006), relationships among partners (Comfort 2008), changes in economic well-being (Geller et al. 2011, Schwartz-Soicher et al. 2011), or educational performance (Cho 2009a,b). In short, paternal incarceration affects child health through its detrimental impact on family and attainment processes important to children's health, such as educational, labor market, and residential attainment.

In a comprehensive treatment of the topic, Wakefield & Wildeman (2013) concluded incarceration has wide-ranging effects on childhood health and well-being, including increasing mental health and behavioral problems. Because the risk of paternal incarceration is much higher for black children than for white children, Wakefield & Wildeman (2011, 2013) concluded that parental incarceration is an important contributor to racial disparities in childhood health and well-being.

Parental incarceration also leads to poor health outcomes by increasing the likelihood that children will adopt behaviors associated with poor health. For instance, parental incarceration is associated with behavioral problems in children (Geller et al. 2011; Murray et al. 2012a,b), including physical aggression (Wildeman 2010) and criminality (Roettger & Swisher 2011). Parental incarceration also leads to increased drug and alcohol use among children, which has obvious implications for the health of children (Roettger et al. 2011). Research also suggests maternal incarceration may have stronger negative effects on children than paternal incarceration does (Murray & Farrington 2008).

Turney (2014) provides an insightful and timely bridge between family health outcomes and larger community and population health outcomes. Even after accounting for an array of relevant factors, Turney found an independent impact of incarceration on outcomes ranging from behavior and conduct problems to developmental delays. She concluded that children's health disadvantages are an overlooked consequence of incarceration, arguing that proliferation of stress across generations is a mechanism by which parental incarceration influences the health of children. Perhaps more importantly, Turney suggested that given its unequal distribution across different demographic groups in the population, incarceration may have implications for population-level class and ethnic inequalities in children's health.

Turney's findings are consistent with research that documents many detrimental effects of incarceration on community and public health (see discussion in Massoglia & Schnittker 2009). One such study used state-level panel data stretching almost 25 years and found an association between incarceration and poorer population health. This association is strongest for infant mortality and female life expectancy (Wildeman 2012). Another study examined the relationship between incarceration and infection rates of immunodeficiency syndromes (Johnson & Raphael 2009). The authors found that incarceration had a significant effect on AIDS infection rates for both males and females and concluded that a large proportion of the racial disparities in AIDS infections among black women can be explained by higher incarceration rates among black men (Johnson & Raphael 2009). One compelling aspect of this study is its use of data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and case-level US data spanning the period 1982–1996, making it both longitudinal and representative.

INCARCERATION AND MORTALITY
Mortality During Incarceration
Studies examining mortality within the prison and comparing within-prison mortality with that of the general population are rare. Mumola (2007) used national-level data to summarize within-prison mortality and compare it with the rates for the US resident population. Although his comparisons between the two populations were not adjusted for differences in age and sex, the results are telling. There were approximately 3,000 deaths per year in US prisons between 2001 and 2004, corresponding to an average annual mortality rate of 250 per 100,000 prisoners. Eighty-nine percent of prison deaths were due to internal causes, with suicide (6% of all deaths) the only external cause in the 10 leading causes of death among prisoners. Other external causes such as homicide, alcohol/drug overdose, and accidental injury comprised 2%, 1%, and 1% of deaths, respectively. The leading causes of death were heart disease (annual rate of 68 per 100,000 prisoners) and cancer (58 per 100,000), followed by liver diseases (25 per 100,000), AIDS (18 per 100,000), and suicide (15 per 100,000). Approximately two-thirds of all deaths, including over 90% of all AIDS-related deaths, resulted from conditions that existed when the inmate entered prison. There was substantial state-level variation in the mortality rate due to internal causes among those incarcerated: the rate in Louisiana, Tennessee, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and Kentucky was approximately three times higher than the rate in Utah, North Dakota, Iowa, Alaska, and Vermont.

In a study of mortality among Texas male inmates between 1992 and 2003, Harzke et al. (2011) found the leading causes of death to be infections, cancer, and cardiovascular disease. Sixty-nine percent of deaths due to infection were caused by AIDS, though as shown in other analyses the inmate death rate due to infection declined substantially over time. Nevertheless, after adjusting for age and race, the authors found that annual mortality rates due to infection were still two to three times higher in the incarcerated population than in the general population of Texas. Inmate deaths due to cardiovascular diseases also dropped sharply over this period, as did deaths due to cancer and liver disease, leading the authors to conclude that changes in health care in the Texas prison system over time—including improvements in screening protocols, in infirmary and outpatient capacity, and in specialty care—may have been responsible for the declines.

Using data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics and the Census Bureau for the period 1985–1998, Patterson (2010) compared sex- and ethnic-specific mortality rates for prisoners and nonprisoners aged 18–65. Although most studies focus on men, Patterson found incarceration to have stronger effects on female mortality than on male mortality. Her results also showed white male prisoners experienced significantly higher death rates than white male nonprisoners did. Using data on men aged 20–79 in North Carolina for the period 1995–2005, Rosen et al. (2011) compared mortality rates of prisoners with those of nonprisoners. The all-cause standardized mortality ratio (SMR) for white inmates was 1.12, with more deaths than expected from HIV and viral hepatitis infections, liver disease, cancer, and respiratory disease. In a retrospective cohort study, Spaulding et al. (2011) examined all persons in Georgia prisons on June 30, 1991, to determine their survivability through the end of 2006. As with prior studies, the authors found white men were at a substantially higher risk for mortality (SMR=1.28) while incarcerated than when not incarcerated. The results of these studies suggest white men are at an increased risk of mortality when living in prison than when not living in prison, and that this risk is driven largely by deaths due to infectious diseases, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. The findings, however, are different for black men.

Does Incarceration Reduce Mortality Among Black Men?
In spite of the growing body of research demonstrating the negative health implications of incarceration, there is increasing evidence that incarceration has a protective effect on mortality rates for black men. Using national-level data, Mumola (2007) found that the mortality rate for black male prisoners aged 15–64 was 19% lower than that for black men in the general population. This was driven, however, by differences in ethnic-specific mortality rates. Incarcerated whites and Hispanics had mortality rates slightly above those for the corresponding groups in the general population, whereas the mortality rate for incarcerated blacks was 57% lower than the rate for blacks in the general population. Patterson's (2010) results also revealed that the substantial inequality in mortality rates for blacks and whites in the general population largely disappeared in the incarcerated population. She found that whereas the within-prison mortality rate for white males was higher than the rate for white males in the general population, the within-prison mortality rate for black males was considerably lower than the rate for black males in the general population. Similarly, using standardized mortality ratios to compare death rates of males in North Carolina prisons with expected death rates based on state residents, Rosen et al. (2011) found 48% fewer deaths than expected among black prisoners.

Why might incarceration protect black males against mortality? First, the controlled prison environment can protect against external causes of death, such as violence and transport accidents, that are high among young black males in the general population (Patterson 2010, Rosen et al. 2011), especially because those incarcerated are probably among the most at risk of death from these causes. Second, low-income black males of all ages may benefit from the availability of healthcare in prison, which would be largely either inaccessible or unused outside prison. Patterson (2010), for example, found that the differential mortality rate between incarcerated and nonincarcerated young black men was not entirely accounted for when firearm and motor vehicle deaths were removed from the general population comparison group. Further, Rosen et al. (2011) found that not only traumatic but also chronic causes of deaths such as cardiovascular disease and cancer were lower than expected among incarcerated black males. Chronic causes of death are more common to an older population. Thus, the food, shelter, and especially medical care provided in prison may protect black males against mortality. The hypothesis of better health care for blacks inside prison relative to outside prison received further evidence from another study by Rosen et al. (2008), who found fewer than expected all-cause deaths and deaths from chronic disorders among black former inmates. The authors of these studies concluded that different aspects of the prison environment, both environmental controls and provision of services, equalize the ethnic mortality disparities outside prison.

Another study, however, suggests an alternative explanation. The practice of compassionate release, i.e., releasing inmates who are in particularly poor health and close to death, is not uncommon in some states. Compassionate release reduces the mortality rate of the incarcerated population and increases the mortality rate of the comparable resident population. In their study of mortality among current and former Georgia prisoners, Spaulding et al. (2011) initially found a substantially lower mortality rate among incarcerated black men relative to nonincarcerated black men. After controlling for the compassionate release of moribund prisoners, however, the effect disappeared. Thus, although environmental controls of the prison may protect against external causes of death for young black men, findings indicating that health care is better for incarcerated black men may stem from an artifact of end-of-life prison policies, and more research is required before definitive conclusions can be drawn.

MORTALITY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING RELEASE FROM PRISON
The majority of studies of incarceration and postrelease mortality examined short-term effects. Analyses conducted in several nations consistently revealed the period immediately following release from prison to be extremely dangerous for ex-inmates (Bird & Hutchinson 2003; Farrell & Marsden 2008; Graham 2003; Kariminia et al. 2007a,b; Pratt et al. 2006; Seaman et al. 1998). Binswanger et al. (2007) undertook a retrospective cohort study of all inmates released from the Washington State Department of Corrections between 1999 and 2003, and compared their mortality rates with those in the state population. Adjusting for age, sex, and ethnicity, the mortality rate for recently released inmates during the entire follow-up period was 777 per 100,000 person-years, which was 3.5 times higher than the rate for the general population. In the first two weeks following release, the death rate was nearly 2,600 per 100,000 person-years, or approximately 13 times higher than the rate for the general population. The authors' finding of a considerable mortality risk in the first two weeks following release from custody is consistent with results from other studies of both prisons (Bird & Hutchinson 2003, Kariminia et al. 2007b, Krinsky et al. 2009, Seaman et al. 1998, Verger et al. 2003) and jails (Lim et al. 2012).

By a wide margin, the leading cause of death for ex-inmates during the immediate postrelease period is drug overdose. Additional leading causes of death during this time include external causes such as homicide and suicide. During this period deaths due to drug overdose are likely the result of several factors related to (a) the behavior of the individual, including polydrug use (especially involving opioids) and decreased physiological tolerance during a period of little or no use while incarcerated, and (b) the interaction between the individual and the criminal justice system, including the failure to properly identify those most at risk, improper or absent prerelease planning and counseling, and little or no provision of health care or follow-up after release (Møller et al. 2010). Further studies are required to determine which characteristics put ex-inmates most at risk of death, not only from drug overdose (Binswanger et al. 2011, Møller et al. 2010) but also from other preventable causes such as homicide and suicide (Pratt et al. 2006), during this period.

LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF INCARCERATION ON MORTALITY
Although fewer studies examined the long-term impact of incarceration on mortality, this is an important exercise because it allows scholars to determine whether any effects of incarceration on morbidity translate to early mortality, whether incarceration increases the risk of premature mortality from internal and chronic causes of death relative to the external and acute causes of death, and whether ex-inmates are at a higher risk of death immediately following release. The results from studies showing the long-term effects of incarceration on mortality are less consistent than those showing short-term effects.

Some studies found an association between incarceration and mortality. In an analysis that linked prison and state death records in North Carolina over a 25-year period, Rosen et al. (2008) used SMRs to compare the mortality of male ex-inmates aged 20–69 with that of other state residents. Although all-cause mortality was higher among ex-prisoners than among other state residents, there were large differences by ethnicity. The all-cause SMRs were 2.08 for whites and 1.03 for blacks (though the latter effect was small, it was statistically significant). The authors found that former inmates had higher-than-expected mortality from homicides, accidents, substance use, HIV, liver disease, and liver cancer. Spaulding et al. (2011) linked prison and death records and estimated SMRs to examine mortality among the cohort of all persons incarcerated in Georgia state prisons on June 30, 1991, through 2006. They found positive and significant SMRs for all ex-inmates and for sex- and ethnic-specific ex-inmate groups. Again, however, SMRs were larger for whites (2.12) than for blacks (1.32). The authors included women in their study and found that SMRs were larger for women (2.56) than for men (1.51). The authors' results revealed that HIV, cancer, cirrhosis, homicide, transport accidents, and overdoses accounted for nearly two-thirds of the excess mortality among former prisoners.

Utilizing data from a large-scale population-based case-control study of Russian men aged 25–54 and controlling for the known causes of premature mortality among this group, Pridemore (2014) estimated mortality odds ratios to examine the association between incarceration and premature mortality. He found that, relative to men who had not been incarcerated, men who had been incarcerated were more than twice as likely to die prematurely. Comparing the age-adjusted odds of specific causes of death of decedent men who had been incarcerated with those of decedent men who had not been incarcerated, the author found the former were more likely to die from infectious diseases (OR=3.10), drug overdose (OR=2.32), homicide (OR=1.99), and respiratory disease (OR=1.79). Patterson (2013) used data from New York state to study the impact of incarceration length on postprison mortality. Her results showed that each additional year in prison produced a nearly 16% increase in the odds of death and a two-year decline in life expectancy. Thus, for someone 30 years old five years in prison would increase the odds of death by approximately 80% and result in a loss in life expectancy of approximately 10 years. As with other studies she found the risk of mortality was highest immediately following release from prison, with the time to recovery equal to approximately two-thirds of the time served in prison. Patterson concluded that incarceration length has a direct impact on life expectancy.

Other evidence suggests incarceration has no long-term effect on mortality. First, although the studies described above have longer-term follow-up periods, they include deaths from the time immediately following release from prison. These deaths may be driving any association found between incarceration and premature mortality, especially because we know many of the excess deaths in these studies of long-term effects resulted from the same causes of death common in studies of mortality during the immediate postrelease period, including drug overdose, homicide, and suicide. Similarly, although Patterson (2013) found that the length of incarceration has dramatic effects on the odds of death and on life expectancy, she also found (a) that return to baseline odds of death occurred after approximately two-thirds of the individual's incarceration length and (b) that 70% of the individuals in her sample were incarcerated less than two years and 86% less than three years.

Second, some studies reveal no association between incarceration and premature mortality. For example, Kjelsberg & Laake (2010) examined all-cause and cause-specific mortality among Norwegian male and female convicted offenders, some of whom had experienced incarceration and some of whom had not. Whereas the unadjusted odds ratio for incarceration was significantly associated with all-cause mortality for men, it was nonsignificant when adjusted for the other variables in the model. Further, they found no association between incarceration and all-cause mortality for women, nor were there effects of incarceration on deaths from substance abuse, accidents, homicides, or suicides. In a study of incarceration and premature mortality using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79), Massoglia et al. (2014) found differential effects by gender. In their sample, women who had been incarcerated were approximately 2.5 times more likely to die prematurely than women who had not been incarcerated. However, incarceration had no effect on premature mortality for men. This stronger effect for women is consistent with the findings from Spaulding et al. (2011).

Finally, Dirkzwager et al. (2012) studied the effects of first-time incarceration on postprison mortality over a 25-year period among a representative group of over 2,000 Dutch offenders who were convicted in 1977. Their findings were equivocal. Results showed that those who had been incarcerated were significantly more likely to die during the follow-up period when compared with the general population (OR=3.21) and with a group of convicted offenders who had not been incarcerated (OR=1.47). After applying propensity score analysis, however, the matched formerly incarcerated group was not at a significantly greater risk of death than the matched control group (OR=1.40; 95% confidence interval: 0.95–2.07). Thus, only a handful of studies have examined incarceration and premature mortality with a long-term follow-up, and the inconsistent findings suggest further research is required before strong conclusions can be drawn.

PATHWAYS LINKING INCARCERATION TO NEGATIVE EFFECTS ON HEALTH
Space limitations preclude us from discussing all possible pathways that explain why incarceration may have negative effects on health. Therefore, we focus our discussion on the potential explanations that have received the most attention in the sociological literature.

Exposure to Infectious Diseases
Although many inmates with an infectious disease entered correctional facilities with the infection, the prison places inmates at a disproportionate risk of acquiring infectious diseases such as tuberculosis, hepatitis, HIV, sexually transmitted infections, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (Maruschak 2008). Approximately 25% of US inmates have latent tuberculosis infection, which is 6 to 10 times higher compared with the general population (Bick 2007). Approximately 17% of inmates have hepatitis C compared with approximately 2% of the general population, with the prison population housing nearly 30% of all hepatitis C cases in the United States (Varan et al. 2014). Compared with approximately 0.3% of the general population, approximately 1.5% of inmates are HIV positive (Maruschak 2012). As in the general population, cases of hepatitis C and HIV in the incarcerated population declined considerably between 2000 and 2010. The disproportionate exposure to infectious diseases for inmates occurs in the context of a prison environment with efficient conditions for disease transmission: overcrowding; poor ventilation; poor nutrition; shared hygiene facilities; shared personal hygiene items such as soap and razors; poor health care; delayed diagnosis; lack of expertise in infection control; prohibitions against effective harm reduction techniques such as use of condoms; and practices such as amateur tattooing and piercing, unprotected sex, and use of unsterilized drug injection equipment. Contracting a disease while in prison increases the chances of ill health upon release and, in the case of tuberculosis, hepatitis C, and HIV, increases the risk of premature mortality.

Incarceration as an Acute and Chronic Stressor
Incarceration is an acute stressor. Imprisonment is a major life event that requires dramatic changes in a short period across a number of life circumstances (Massoglia 2008a). Research shows such events cause considerable stress, which can have negative repercussions for health (Thoits 1995, Wheaton 1994). Incarceration is also a chronic stressor (Pearlin 1989). Imprisonment can last for years, adding chronic stress to the initial acute shock. Daily stressors in prison can include lack of privacy, overcrowded conditions, antagonistic relationships with guards and inmates, witnessing violence, and the threat of violent victimization. Upon release from prison, former inmates must deal with enduring stressors such as social stigma and the disruption of social bonds such as employment and relationships with family and friends.

Research consistently shows that stress is negatively associated with health. Exposure to repeated or chronic stressors increases allostatic load, which can lead to negative health outcomes (McEwen & Stellar 1993). The psychoneuroimmunology literature, for example, reveals that chronic stress is associated with immune dysfunction (Glaser & Kiecolt-Glaser 2005), and research shows that chronic exposure to hostile conditions—a staple of prison life—is associated with immune dysfunction that can last for long periods. According to Pridemore (2014, p. 217), this “stress-induced immune dysfunction perversely increases the inmate's vulnerability at precisely the time when exposure to infectious diseases is greatest, during imprisonment.” Beyond the confines of the prison, Schnittker & John (2007) found evidence suggesting the enduring social stigma of imprisonment mediates the association between incarceration and health, and Massoglia (2008a) found that former prisoners had increased risks of (a) being medically diagnosed with stress-related illnesses such as psychological problems, hypertension, and heart disease, and (b) self-reporting stress-related conditions such as chest pain and depression.

Incarceration as an Impediment to Social Integration
Incarceration is extremely disruptive to social integration and prosocial bonds. First, imprisonment makes it difficult to maintain stable family and friendship networks. The stigma attached to those who have been incarcerated makes them less desirable partners (Wilson 1987) and they have lower marriage rates following imprisonment (Huebner 2005). Individuals married at the time of incarceration have a greater risk of divorce both during and after imprisonment (Apel et al. 2010, Massoglia et al. 2011). Siennick et al. (2014) found that such marriages are at increased risk of poor marital quality, relationship violence, and extramarital sex and that these factors explain approximately 40% of the association between incarceration and divorce. Second, in many instances daily prison life requires social and psychological adaptations that make it difficult to reintegrate into the community and to develop and maintain healthy friendships following release (Braman 2004).

Third, the effects of incarceration on employment and earnings are varied but substantial. Experimental evidence shows that employers are biased against hiring former inmates (Pager 2003), and in their sample of Dutch offenders Ramakers et al. (2014) found a dose-response relationship between length of incarceration and poor employment prospects. Ex-inmates have limited access to career-oriented occupations and thus are often relegated to undesirable jobs with low wages, poor benefits, and no health insurance. Incarceration is associated with lower earnings growth over one's employment career (Sampson & Laub 1993) and with a wage penalty of 10–30% (Western et al. 2001). Western (2002) found the impact of incarceration on wage mobility so strong and the prevalence of imprisonment among black men so high, he concluded that incarceration is partially responsible for aggregate-level ethnic wage inequality in the United States. In short, incarceration is a major turning point in the life course and is remarkably disruptive for social integration (Sampson & Laub 2003).

Social integration and prosocial bonds, including education, marriage, social support, employment, and income, provide protective effects against morbidity and mortality. Marriage has long been associated with better health and increased longevity, especially for men (Verbrugge 1979). Using the same data from a case-control study of Russian men that showed an association between incarceration and premature mortality (Pridemore 2014), Pridemore et al. (2010) found that marriage and education were inversely associated with the risk of premature mortality. Declines in perceived health and physical functioning are slowed by full-time employment (Ross & Mirowsky 1995) and income is inversely associated with both morbidity and mortality (Backlund et al. 1996, Ecob & Davey Smith 1999). Given these findings, Pridemore (2014) argued that social integration and prosocial bonds likely play key mediating roles in the relationship between incarceration and premature mortality.

LIMITATIONS OF RESEARCH ON INCARCERATION AND HEALTH
Data
There are several limitations to prior research on incarceration and health. One of the most pressing issues in this area is data scarcity. A few data sets, for instance, the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and 1997, and the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, have been the source of data for a great deal of research in the area. Each data set has different strengths and weaknesses and scholars have been successful in moving the field forward using each, but a common thread permeates them: All are secondary data designed to study other phenomena and social processes. Given this, it becomes challenging to adequately address important issues such as selection effects (see below).

Data limitations in this area also impact the most basic aspects of research: the dependent and independent variables. Data on incarceration are comparatively scarce and there is considerable variation in how incarceration is operationalized. Some studies operationalize incarceration as a short period in a jail, others as imprisonment of over a year, and others as lifetime prevalence of incarceration. Although each of these measures has potential strengths and weaknesses, it is necessary to move research toward greater conceptual clarity on the treatment variable and to consider how different operationalizations of incarceration might condition findings. Similar problems can often plague the outcome variables. Studies thus far commonly employ different operationalizations of health, making it difficult to compare results. Finally, perhaps most pressing is the need for longitudinal measures of health outcomes. We know inmates have more health problems than noninmates do, but moving toward causal claims places greater demands on the data, including repeated measures over time that allow scholars to employ a full range of analytical approaches.

Proper Comparison Groups
We know that inmates have increased medical problems compared with the general population (Binswanger et al. 2009), but absent more information it remains unclear whether differences are a function of incarceration or of characteristics that are related both to health and to the likelihood of incarceration. Thus, with whom we compare (ex-)inmates is of paramount importance. Much work, including some of ours, compares inmates with noninmates after adjusting for a number of covariates. Although data limitations often prevent more fine-grained comparative analysis, the problems of covariate adjustment for causal inferences are well known. Although within-person change models, often termed fixed-effects or individual trajectory models, offer the most stringent tests of the incarceration–health relationship, such analyses demand longitudinal data with repeated measures that are often lacking in this area of research. In cases in which data limitations prevent such analysis, a fruitful comparison group might be individuals convicted of a crime but not incarcerated. Compared with the general population, this group of convicted but nonincarcerated felons is more similar to the incarcerated population and thus might be a more appropriate comparison group. Regardless of the specific focus, as research in the area moves forward, increased attention to the appropriate comparison groups is required.

Selection Effects
One of the most pressing issues facing the research on incarceration and heath is potential bias from selection effects. As Johnson & Easterling argued (2012, p. 342),

Despite what appears to be converging evidence that parental incarceration poses a significant threat to child development, this area of inquiry has yet to overcome important methodological and conceptual challenges related to selection bias. It is therefore unclear whether the difficulties that have been observed among children whose parents are incarcerated are due to the incarceration itself or to other adversities that children have experienced.
Although others have offered a thoughtful and systematic response to such critiques (Wildeman et al. 2013), our point is a basic one: Given how closely the correlates of incarceration map over the determinants of poor heath, scholars must pay particular attention to potential bias from selection effects and employ rigorous analytical methods and careful research designs to address it. Absent such careful consideration, this area of research remains open to critiques of selection bias. For instance, inmates may have poorer health profiles because of a history of drug use rather than incarceration itself. Along similar lines, perhaps the appearance of an effect of parental incarceration on children's health is actually a product of parental absenteeism, or maybe the apparent effect of incarceration on individual health is a product of earnings inequality or of individual or family characteristics early in life that increase the chances both of incarceration and of poor health. Although some research in the area has begun to address these important critiques, future research meant to estimate the precise magnitude of the impact of incarceration on individual, family, and community health must recognize the potential bias of selection effects.

AN AGENDA FOR FUTURE RESEARCH ON THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN INCARCERATION AND HEALTH
Although research on incarceration and health has rapidly grown in recent years, many important substantive and methodological items remain to be addressed. Although our suggestions are not exhaustive, we propose several important considerations for the scientific record as researchers move forward in understanding this relationship. One area that appears ripe for additional inquiry is the treatment variable. The literature takes a fairly broad view of the term incarceration. Without giving preference to one over the other, some data sets appear to capture more invasive spells of imprisonment, whereas others might capture just a few days in jail (e.g., see collection protocol differences between the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997). According to recent data, the average sentence in state prisons is slightly over 4 years, with offenders serving roughly half of the sentence. In contrast, most spells in jail are less than 3 days, and many people who spend a few nights in jail are ultimately not convicted of any crime. Given these diverse treatments, future work should investigate whether these different types and lengths of correctional confinement produce divergent effects (Massoglia & Warner 2011).

A related line of inquiry might examine how different levels of confinement—for example, minimum versus maximum security—might be associated with differences in and severity of adverse health outcomes. In addition, work has not considered whether there is state or regional variation in the incarceration–health relationship. It may be, for instance, that states with more integrative postrelease policies have better health outcomes. Along similar lines, although the United States is the world leader in terms of incarceration, comparative sociologically oriented work on incarceration and health is relatively sparse (Pridemore 2014). The field would surely be advanced if scholars brought more comparative approaches to this area. For example, incarceration may still affect health even in nations with lower incarceration rates and shorter sentence lengths. Yet research could examine, for instance, whether cultural differences across nations likely influence the structure of prisons and the experience of incarceration, both of which could affect any impact of incarceration on health (and of course on other collateral consequences of incarceration).

Research should also move toward a focus on the causal mechanisms linking incarceration to poor health outcomes. Thus far, research has done a better job showing that incarceration matters rather than why incarceration matters. A great deal of research discusses stress and stigma. Both potential mechanisms have pragmatic appeal and research in both criminology and medical sociology suggests they are appropriate explanatory mechanisms. To date, however, precise specifications of the causal pathways linking these and related factors to health have been elusive. Such causal pathways to poor health outcomes are notoriously difficult to model, but as this research area matures, identifying causal mechanisms must progress.

Greater research on female (ex-)inmates would also advance the field. To date, much of the work in the area has excluded female offenders. This omission is notable for a number of reasons. First, although much smaller, the size of the female incarcerated population is growing far faster than the size of the male population. Second, female inmates have a different set of risk factors across a number of areas—drug use, relationship history, history of abuse—that are likely linked to health outcomes (see Lindquist & Lindquist 1997). Third, compared with men, women have a different set of health needs, suggesting that the incarceration experience may differentially impact women's health. The research of Massoglia et al. (2014) and Spaulding et al. (2011) provides evidence not only that the health consequences of incarceration are different for men and women but that the negative effects may be stronger for women, at least on some outcomes. Given the differences between male and female offenders, a sustained and focused inquiry into potential gender differences in the incarceration–health relationship seems particularly timely.

As research on the incarceration–health relationship moves forward, two other related substantive avenues for future research are important. At first view each avenue appears somewhat counterintuitive. This research area would be well served if future research considered the potential positive impact of incarceration on health at both the individual and community levels. Although research has clearly demonstrated a negative impact of incarceration on individual health across a variety of outcomes, other work has demonstrated differential effects of incarceration on family life (Wildeman & Turney 2014), and a consideration of the potentially positive impact of incarceration on health is warranted for a number of reasons.

At the individual level, on average persons who are incarcerated often are drawn disproportionately from a disadvantaged background. Given less access to health care and the generally poorer health status of those from these disadvantaged backgrounds, the correctional institution may provide inmates with opportunities to improve their health. The correctional setting provides some inmates better access to fundamental health needs such as nutrition and a place to sleep that is heated and dry. Aside from these most basic health requirements, which surely are not met for some of these individuals outside of prison, the institution removes some individuals from destructive social environments that may include high levels of drug use and, particularly for women, a history of physical abuse. Removing individuals from such environments might provide some health benefits. Finally, although often lacking in several respects, health care provisions in prisons may represent a dramatic improvement over the care (if any) some inmates receive outside prison. In short, due to the extremely disadvantaged background from which many inmates are drawn, there is a rationale for exploring the possibility of a positive, even if short-term or limited, impact of incarceration on the individual health of some inmates. Our review reveals evidence of such potential short- and long-term positive effects of incarceration on health (Mumola 2007; Patterson 2010; Rosen et al. 2011, 2008). This is a sensitive topic, and obviously the policy response is not to increase incarceration in hopes of better health outcomes. The results are intriguing, however, and if they hold up, they will serve as a stark indicator of the generally poor health care provided to this segment of the population. Further, they would suggest the importance of better education about and more careful planning for postrelease health care and for more rational policies for sharing medical data with parole officers, social workers, and others tasked with aiding prisoners upon release.

Similarly, the prison may produce other types of health benefits, in particular for treatable diseases. Again the potential benefits stem from the reality of the marginal or nonexistent health care inmates have on the outside, and at the aggregate level it is important to consider the remarkable expansion and size of the penal system. Correctional facilities offer an opportunity to impact the health profile of a large and underserved aspect of the community. Many state prison systems screen for and treat communicable diseases. For specific diseases or infections for which treatment can cure an illness or provide lasting improvement in health functioning, correctional facilities offer the potential to improve individual health and aggregate health inequities. For instance, because data indicate that a large number of individuals with treatable sexually transmitted infections are passing through correctional facilities, screening and treatment in prisons could not only improve individual health but also reduce the prevalence of infections in the general community. In short, given the high levels of inequality and health disparities characteristic of American society at both the individual and community levels, it could be fruitful to investigate how the penal system could produce some improvements in health outcomes.

A paramount item to address in future research is data collection and research design. To this point nearly all studies of the incarceration–health association employed secondary data. This approach presents important methodological and theoretical challenges. Methodologically, for example, many of these studies are vulnerable to selection bias. Theoretically, these data sets do not allow us to test several important hypotheses about the incarceration–health association because data collection was undertaken to answer other questions. Now that there is strong evidence that incarceration has consequences for individual, family, and community health, it is time to undertake large-scale projects that focus specifically on this association. These projects would involve original data collection aimed at and research designs capable of answering the most poignant theoretical questions now being posed in this research area. This type of original data collection would allow us to (a) address methodological limitations such as selection effects, (b) determine whether the health effects of incarceration are causal or spurious, and (c) undertake tests of theory capable of discovering the direct, indirect, and conditional causal pathways through which incarceration influences health.

Finally, our review is notable for what fell outside our specific scope of inquiry. For example, space limitations prevented us from systematically reviewing the rapidly expanding literature on the impact of incarceration on mental health outcomes.2 Similar to the literature on physical health, the literature on the mental health consequences of incarceration considers the impact on both inmates (Schnittker et al. 2012) and family members of those who are incarcerated (Turney et al. 2012, Wildeman et al. 2013). This important line of research is still emerging, and future research focused on clarifying the scope of incarceration's impact on mental health outcomes and the specific mechanisms that produce such effects would advance this research area. Similarly, we were able to only broadly consider how incarceration may disrupt family functioning in ways that are related to a host of developmental and health outcomes for both children and spouses of inmates (see Turney 2015, Turney & Wildeman 2015). Further inquiry into this area is important to determine the breadth and range of the collateral consequences of incarceration and to test the possible causal pathways linking incarceration and health.

CONCLUSION
In the last decade there has been a sustained research focus on the health consequences of incarceration. Sociologists across a range of subfields, including criminology, stratification, life course processes, family functioning, and medical sociology, have undertaken research on the topic. In this review we attempt to summarize this rapidly expanding literature while pointing to areas in which additional research is warranted. Despite the wealth of articles published in recent years, research in the area is still at its nascent stages, as is—from a historical context—our understanding of the penal system and its effects on society. As the number of individuals released from prison grows, and as they advance in age, research on the relationship between incarceration and health will continue to speak to a host of critical academic, social, and policy issues. To that end, we view the important work to date as a starting point for future research in the area.

        Given the text identify a series of relationships between variables that have a well defined positive direction and a clear textual backing.
        For example, if a text says "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate" would be good variables. Variables that are implied but not directly stated by the text such as "education infilstructure" should not be included. 
        The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 
        or 'inconclusive'. The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
        The SupportText field of your output should include a section of verbatim from the text in addition to any comments you want to make about your output.
        Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices.

        The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "isCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "isCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```
        


Input begins:

        Abstract
The expansion of the penal system has been one of the most dramatic trends in contemporary American society. A wealth of research has examined the impact of incarceration on a range of later life outcomes and has considered how the penal system has emerged as a mechanism of stratification and inequality in the United States. In this article, we review the literature from a comparatively new vein of this research: the impact of incarceration on health outcomes. We first consider the impact of incarceration on a range of individual outcomes, from chronic health conditions to mortality. We then consider outcomes beyond the individual, including the health of family members and community health outcomes. Next, we discuss mechanisms linking incarceration and health outcomes before closing with a consideration of limitations in the field and directions for future research.

Keywords
incarceration, health, mortality, inequality, stress

INTRODUCTION
This article reviews the sociological literature on the effects of incarceration on health, focusing specifically on physical morbidity and mortality. During the last four decades the American penal system grew at an unprecedented rate. The incarceration rate, which was roughly stable for 50 years prior to 1975, increased approximately fivefold since 1975 (Pettit & Western 2004). More than six million US residents are now or have been incarcerated and there are over 17 million felons or ex-felons in the United States. These numbers demonstrate the massive size of the penal system, and the current felon population is approximately six times larger than it was in 1970 (Uggen et al. 2006). Although the expansion of the penal system has affected all demographic groups, the impact was most acute for disadvantaged minorities and minority communities, for which rates of incarceration are five to eight times higher than rates for similarly situated whites (Pettit & Western 2004).

The penal system grew so large and so rapidly it now draws comparisons to the American system of higher education. Each year approximately as many men graduate college as are released from prison (Knapp et al. 2008), and the size of the incarcerated population (Glaze & Parks 2012) is approximately the same as the enrollment at all American research universities (Snyder & Dillow 2010). Given this rapid expansion and the wide swath the penal system cuts through American society, some argue incarceration is now a phase in the life course for some population subgroups (Pettit & Western 2004) and that correctional policies have created a new felon class in American society (Uggen et al. 2006).

This remarkable growth produced a groundswell of research highlighting the far-reaching consequences of incarceration. For example, research illustrates the consequences of incarceration for family functioning, including the mental health of inmates' partners, the behavior of their children, and the impact of incarceration on marital dissolution (Comfort 2007, Goffman 2009, Lopoo & Western 2005, Massoglia et al. 2011, Turney et al. 2012, Western & Wildeman 2009). A related line of research reveals the stratifying impact of incarceration on economic indicators such as childhood poverty and on wages and entrance into the labor market (Pager 2003, Pager et al. 2009, Western 2002, Wildeman 2009). Scholars are becoming increasingly aware of the stratifying impact of incarceration and penal sanctions on a range of social and economic inequalities (Harris et al. 2010, Wakefield & Uggen 2010). Given that the expansion of the penal system has disproportionately impacted minorities (Pettit & Western 2004), it is important to consider whether and to what extent minorities and minority communities disproportionately feel the indirect consequences of the expansion. At least two distinct processes may drive any disproportionate impact of the penal system (Massoglia 2008b). First, as a percentage of the population many more minorities are exposed to the penal system, so even if the effect is the same across different races the aggregate impact will be larger for minority groups. Second, for a variety of reasons the detrimental consequences of incarceration could be felt more strongly by minorities. Thus, the current state of the field shows incarceration has emerged as a mechanism of stratification in American society and contributes to racial inequality.

Against this backdrop, the impact of incarceration on health outcomes and inequalities has received considerable attention, and in this article we review this body of research. We begin by discussing the general association between incarceration and individual health functioning. From there, we expand our scope and consider the impact of incarceration on family and neighborhood indicators of health. Next, we discuss the literature on the association between incarceration and mortality. Following that, we consider whether incarceration may have health benefits for some demographic groups. We then discuss the key potential sociological explanations for the relationship between incarceration and health. We conclude by discussing some of the limitations of the research on incarceration and health and then outline an agenda for future research in the incarceration–health tradition.

INCARCERATION AND MORBIDITY
Individual Health
A number of studies have examined the relationship between incarceration and a range of individual-level health outcomes. Some of the most innovative research in this area leveraged longitudinal data to examine within-person change in health status after a period of incarceration. Schnittker & John (2007), for example, focused on within-person change using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79). Three findings from this important paper set the stage for later sociological work in the area. First, the authors found that individuals with a history of incarceration report more chronic health problems after their period of incarceration than before. Second, the authors accounted for chronic health problems prior to prison, which allowed them to demonstrate empirically that incarceration is associated with a negative change in health status. Third, Schnittker & John found that the impact of the length of incarceration on health appears to be less important than the fact of incarceration itself.

Other works utilizing the same data set (NLSY) reached similar conclusions. For example, Massoglia (2008a) found that incarceration is correlated with lower self-reported health and that having been incarcerated was more consequential than the length of incarceration. Similarly, using the same data set, Massoglia (2008b) found that relative to those who had not been incarcerated, those who had been incarcerated disproportionately suffer from infectious diseases (e.g., hepatitis, tuberculosis) and stress-related illness.

Other studies looked at different aspects of health and considered the potential impact of incarceration. For example, obesity is a socially patterned epidemic with higher prevalence among those of lower socioeconomic status and among ethnic/racial minorities. For instance, Houle (2014) investigated how incarceration might contribute to patterns of obesity. The author examined trajectories of body mass index (BMI) and found that being incarcerated increases BMI. The effects varied, however, with strongest effects for blacks and for individuals with less education. In the conclusion the author echoed a common theme across many studies in the area: Given the disproportionate rates of incarceration, and the stronger effects for blacks, the penal system may condition the structure of obesity disparities across the life course (Houle 2014).1

FAMILY, NEIGHBORHOOD, AND POPULATION HEALTH
An emerging literature examines the detrimental impact of incarceration on family, neighborhood, and population health. The impact of incarceration on health, including mental health (Wildeman et al. 2012), extends to family members (including partners and children) of those who are incarcerated (Wakefield & Wildeman 2013, Wildeman & Muller 2012). Roettger & Boardman (2012) used the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health to investigate the impact of parental incarceration on childhood body mass. Using multiple analytic approaches and accounting for several potentially confounding factors such as stressful life events and individual and family characteristics, the authors found that parental incarceration is associated with increased body mass among female, but not male, children of those who were incarcerated.

Lee et al. (2014) also found that results vary by gender. Having a family member incarcerated increased the likelihood of women to experience a heart attack, stroke, or obesity or to have fair to poor health. There was no relationship found among males who had a family member incarcerated. This study revealed that the incarceration of a family member has implications for women's cardiovascular health and, consistent with other literature in the area, that incarceration contributes to overall racial disparities in health. Given the current data limitations of studying incarceration and health, this study is also notable because it utilized the National Survey of American Life, a cross-sectional, nationally representative study.

The Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study is one of the most widely used data sets to study the effects of incarceration on families (see Wildeman & Western 2010). What becomes clear from fragile families, and is relevant for understanding the health problems associated with incarceration, is that the families most likely to be affected by incarceration are often disadvantaged socially, residentially, and economically. That is, the families most likely to experience incarceration are already at risk for problematic outcomes, including poor health.

In contrast to other research that focuses on the direct effects of incarceration on health outcomes, many of the harmful effects of incarceration on children's health operate indirectly through other mechanisms, including family processes (Arditti et al. 2003, Waller & Swisher 2006), relationships among partners (Comfort 2008), changes in economic well-being (Geller et al. 2011, Schwartz-Soicher et al. 2011), or educational performance (Cho 2009a,b). In short, paternal incarceration affects child health through its detrimental impact on family and attainment processes important to children's health, such as educational, labor market, and residential attainment.

In a comprehensive treatment of the topic, Wakefield & Wildeman (2013) concluded incarceration has wide-ranging effects on childhood health and well-being, including increasing mental health and behavioral problems. Because the risk of paternal incarceration is much higher for black children than for white children, Wakefield & Wildeman (2011, 2013) concluded that parental incarceration is an important contributor to racial disparities in childhood health and well-being.

Parental incarceration also leads to poor health outcomes by increasing the likelihood that children will adopt behaviors associated with poor health. For instance, parental incarceration is associated with behavioral problems in children (Geller et al. 2011; Murray et al. 2012a,b), including physical aggression (Wildeman 2010) and criminality (Roettger & Swisher 2011). Parental incarceration also leads to increased drug and alcohol use among children, which has obvious implications for the health of children (Roettger et al. 2011). Research also suggests maternal incarceration may have stronger negative effects on children than paternal incarceration does (Murray & Farrington 2008).

Turney (2014) provides an insightful and timely bridge between family health outcomes and larger community and population health outcomes. Even after accounting for an array of relevant factors, Turney found an independent impact of incarceration on outcomes ranging from behavior and conduct problems to developmental delays. She concluded that children's health disadvantages are an overlooked consequence of incarceration, arguing that proliferation of stress across generations is a mechanism by which parental incarceration influences the health of children. Perhaps more importantly, Turney suggested that given its unequal distribution across different demographic groups in the population, incarceration may have implications for population-level class and ethnic inequalities in children's health.

Turney's findings are consistent with research that documents many detrimental effects of incarceration on community and public health (see discussion in Massoglia & Schnittker 2009). One such study used state-level panel data stretching almost 25 years and found an association between incarceration and poorer population health. This association is strongest for infant mortality and female life expectancy (Wildeman 2012). Another study examined the relationship between incarceration and infection rates of immunodeficiency syndromes (Johnson & Raphael 2009). The authors found that incarceration had a significant effect on AIDS infection rates for both males and females and concluded that a large proportion of the racial disparities in AIDS infections among black women can be explained by higher incarceration rates among black men (Johnson & Raphael 2009). One compelling aspect of this study is its use of data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and case-level US data spanning the period 1982–1996, making it both longitudinal and representative.

INCARCERATION AND MORTALITY
Mortality During Incarceration
Studies examining mortality within the prison and comparing within-prison mortality with that of the general population are rare. Mumola (2007) used national-level data to summarize within-prison mortality and compare it with the rates for the US resident population. Although his comparisons between the two populations were not adjusted for differences in age and sex, the results are telling. There were approximately 3,000 deaths per year in US prisons between 2001 and 2004, corresponding to an average annual mortality rate of 250 per 100,000 prisoners. Eighty-nine percent of prison deaths were due to internal causes, with suicide (6% of all deaths) the only external cause in the 10 leading causes of death among prisoners. Other external causes such as homicide, alcohol/drug overdose, and accidental injury comprised 2%, 1%, and 1% of deaths, respectively. The leading causes of death were heart disease (annual rate of 68 per 100,000 prisoners) and cancer (58 per 100,000), followed by liver diseases (25 per 100,000), AIDS (18 per 100,000), and suicide (15 per 100,000). Approximately two-thirds of all deaths, including over 90% of all AIDS-related deaths, resulted from conditions that existed when the inmate entered prison. There was substantial state-level variation in the mortality rate due to internal causes among those incarcerated: the rate in Louisiana, Tennessee, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and Kentucky was approximately three times higher than the rate in Utah, North Dakota, Iowa, Alaska, and Vermont.

In a study of mortality among Texas male inmates between 1992 and 2003, Harzke et al. (2011) found the leading causes of death to be infections, cancer, and cardiovascular disease. Sixty-nine percent of deaths due to infection were caused by AIDS, though as shown in other analyses the inmate death rate due to infection declined substantially over time. Nevertheless, after adjusting for age and race, the authors found that annual mortality rates due to infection were still two to three times higher in the incarcerated population than in the general population of Texas. Inmate deaths due to cardiovascular diseases also dropped sharply over this period, as did deaths due to cancer and liver disease, leading the authors to conclude that changes in health care in the Texas prison system over time—including improvements in screening protocols, in infirmary and outpatient capacity, and in specialty care—may have been responsible for the declines.

Using data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics and the Census Bureau for the period 1985–1998, Patterson (2010) compared sex- and ethnic-specific mortality rates for prisoners and nonprisoners aged 18–65. Although most studies focus on men, Patterson found incarceration to have stronger effects on female mortality than on male mortality. Her results also showed white male prisoners experienced significantly higher death rates than white male nonprisoners did. Using data on men aged 20–79 in North Carolina for the period 1995–2005, Rosen et al. (2011) compared mortality rates of prisoners with those of nonprisoners. The all-cause standardized mortality ratio (SMR) for white inmates was 1.12, with more deaths than expected from HIV and viral hepatitis infections, liver disease, cancer, and respiratory disease. In a retrospective cohort study, Spaulding et al. (2011) examined all persons in Georgia prisons on June 30, 1991, to determine their survivability through the end of 2006. As with prior studies, the authors found white men were at a substantially higher risk for mortality (SMR=1.28) while incarcerated than when not incarcerated. The results of these studies suggest white men are at an increased risk of mortality when living in prison than when not living in prison, and that this risk is driven largely by deaths due to infectious diseases, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. The findings, however, are different for black men.

Does Incarceration Reduce Mortality Among Black Men?
In spite of the growing body of research demonstrating the negative health implications of incarceration, there is increasing evidence that incarceration has a protective effect on mortality rates for black men. Using national-level data, Mumola (2007) found that the mortality rate for black male prisoners aged 15–64 was 19% lower than that for black men in the general population. This was driven, however, by differences in ethnic-specific mortality rates. Incarcerated whites and Hispanics had mortality rates slightly above those for the corresponding groups in the general population, whereas the mortality rate for incarcerated blacks was 57% lower than the rate for blacks in the general population. Patterson's (2010) results also revealed that the substantial inequality in mortality rates for blacks and whites in the general population largely disappeared in the incarcerated population. She found that whereas the within-prison mortality rate for white males was higher than the rate for white males in the general population, the within-prison mortality rate for black males was considerably lower than the rate for black males in the general population. Similarly, using standardized mortality ratios to compare death rates of males in North Carolina prisons with expected death rates based on state residents, Rosen et al. (2011) found 48% fewer deaths than expected among black prisoners.

Why might incarceration protect black males against mortality? First, the controlled prison environment can protect against external causes of death, such as violence and transport accidents, that are high among young black males in the general population (Patterson 2010, Rosen et al. 2011), especially because those incarcerated are probably among the most at risk of death from these causes. Second, low-income black males of all ages may benefit from the availability of healthcare in prison, which would be largely either inaccessible or unused outside prison. Patterson (2010), for example, found that the differential mortality rate between incarcerated and nonincarcerated young black men was not entirely accounted for when firearm and motor vehicle deaths were removed from the general population comparison group. Further, Rosen et al. (2011) found that not only traumatic but also chronic causes of deaths such as cardiovascular disease and cancer were lower than expected among incarcerated black males. Chronic causes of death are more common to an older population. Thus, the food, shelter, and especially medical care provided in prison may protect black males against mortality. The hypothesis of better health care for blacks inside prison relative to outside prison received further evidence from another study by Rosen et al. (2008), who found fewer than expected all-cause deaths and deaths from chronic disorders among black former inmates. The authors of these studies concluded that different aspects of the prison environment, both environmental controls and provision of services, equalize the ethnic mortality disparities outside prison.

Another study, however, suggests an alternative explanation. The practice of compassionate release, i.e., releasing inmates who are in particularly poor health and close to death, is not uncommon in some states. Compassionate release reduces the mortality rate of the incarcerated population and increases the mortality rate of the comparable resident population. In their study of mortality among current and former Georgia prisoners, Spaulding et al. (2011) initially found a substantially lower mortality rate among incarcerated black men relative to nonincarcerated black men. After controlling for the compassionate release of moribund prisoners, however, the effect disappeared. Thus, although environmental controls of the prison may protect against external causes of death for young black men, findings indicating that health care is better for incarcerated black men may stem from an artifact of end-of-life prison policies, and more research is required before definitive conclusions can be drawn.

MORTALITY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING RELEASE FROM PRISON
The majority of studies of incarceration and postrelease mortality examined short-term effects. Analyses conducted in several nations consistently revealed the period immediately following release from prison to be extremely dangerous for ex-inmates (Bird & Hutchinson 2003; Farrell & Marsden 2008; Graham 2003; Kariminia et al. 2007a,b; Pratt et al. 2006; Seaman et al. 1998). Binswanger et al. (2007) undertook a retrospective cohort study of all inmates released from the Washington State Department of Corrections between 1999 and 2003, and compared their mortality rates with those in the state population. Adjusting for age, sex, and ethnicity, the mortality rate for recently released inmates during the entire follow-up period was 777 per 100,000 person-years, which was 3.5 times higher than the rate for the general population. In the first two weeks following release, the death rate was nearly 2,600 per 100,000 person-years, or approximately 13 times higher than the rate for the general population. The authors' finding of a considerable mortality risk in the first two weeks following release from custody is consistent with results from other studies of both prisons (Bird & Hutchinson 2003, Kariminia et al. 2007b, Krinsky et al. 2009, Seaman et al. 1998, Verger et al. 2003) and jails (Lim et al. 2012).

By a wide margin, the leading cause of death for ex-inmates during the immediate postrelease period is drug overdose. Additional leading causes of death during this time include external causes such as homicide and suicide. During this period deaths due to drug overdose are likely the result of several factors related to (a) the behavior of the individual, including polydrug use (especially involving opioids) and decreased physiological tolerance during a period of little or no use while incarcerated, and (b) the interaction between the individual and the criminal justice system, including the failure to properly identify those most at risk, improper or absent prerelease planning and counseling, and little or no provision of health care or follow-up after release (Møller et al. 2010). Further studies are required to determine which characteristics put ex-inmates most at risk of death, not only from drug overdose (Binswanger et al. 2011, Møller et al. 2010) but also from other preventable causes such as homicide and suicide (Pratt et al. 2006), during this period.

LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF INCARCERATION ON MORTALITY
Although fewer studies examined the long-term impact of incarceration on mortality, this is an important exercise because it allows scholars to determine whether any effects of incarceration on morbidity translate to early mortality, whether incarceration increases the risk of premature mortality from internal and chronic causes of death relative to the external and acute causes of death, and whether ex-inmates are at a higher risk of death immediately following release. The results from studies showing the long-term effects of incarceration on mortality are less consistent than those showing short-term effects.

Some studies found an association between incarceration and mortality. In an analysis that linked prison and state death records in North Carolina over a 25-year period, Rosen et al. (2008) used SMRs to compare the mortality of male ex-inmates aged 20–69 with that of other state residents. Although all-cause mortality was higher among ex-prisoners than among other state residents, there were large differences by ethnicity. The all-cause SMRs were 2.08 for whites and 1.03 for blacks (though the latter effect was small, it was statistically significant). The authors found that former inmates had higher-than-expected mortality from homicides, accidents, substance use, HIV, liver disease, and liver cancer. Spaulding et al. (2011) linked prison and death records and estimated SMRs to examine mortality among the cohort of all persons incarcerated in Georgia state prisons on June 30, 1991, through 2006. They found positive and significant SMRs for all ex-inmates and for sex- and ethnic-specific ex-inmate groups. Again, however, SMRs were larger for whites (2.12) than for blacks (1.32). The authors included women in their study and found that SMRs were larger for women (2.56) than for men (1.51). The authors' results revealed that HIV, cancer, cirrhosis, homicide, transport accidents, and overdoses accounted for nearly two-thirds of the excess mortality among former prisoners.

Utilizing data from a large-scale population-based case-control study of Russian men aged 25–54 and controlling for the known causes of premature mortality among this group, Pridemore (2014) estimated mortality odds ratios to examine the association between incarceration and premature mortality. He found that, relative to men who had not been incarcerated, men who had been incarcerated were more than twice as likely to die prematurely. Comparing the age-adjusted odds of specific causes of death of decedent men who had been incarcerated with those of decedent men who had not been incarcerated, the author found the former were more likely to die from infectious diseases (OR=3.10), drug overdose (OR=2.32), homicide (OR=1.99), and respiratory disease (OR=1.79). Patterson (2013) used data from New York state to study the impact of incarceration length on postprison mortality. Her results showed that each additional year in prison produced a nearly 16% increase in the odds of death and a two-year decline in life expectancy. Thus, for someone 30 years old five years in prison would increase the odds of death by approximately 80% and result in a loss in life expectancy of approximately 10 years. As with other studies she found the risk of mortality was highest immediately following release from prison, with the time to recovery equal to approximately two-thirds of the time served in prison. Patterson concluded that incarceration length has a direct impact on life expectancy.

Other evidence suggests incarceration has no long-term effect on mortality. First, although the studies described above have longer-term follow-up periods, they include deaths from the time immediately following release from prison. These deaths may be driving any association found between incarceration and premature mortality, especially because we know many of the excess deaths in these studies of long-term effects resulted from the same causes of death common in studies of mortality during the immediate postrelease period, including drug overdose, homicide, and suicide. Similarly, although Patterson (2013) found that the length of incarceration has dramatic effects on the odds of death and on life expectancy, she also found (a) that return to baseline odds of death occurred after approximately two-thirds of the individual's incarceration length and (b) that 70% of the individuals in her sample were incarcerated less than two years and 86% less than three years.

Second, some studies reveal no association between incarceration and premature mortality. For example, Kjelsberg & Laake (2010) examined all-cause and cause-specific mortality among Norwegian male and female convicted offenders, some of whom had experienced incarceration and some of whom had not. Whereas the unadjusted odds ratio for incarceration was significantly associated with all-cause mortality for men, it was nonsignificant when adjusted for the other variables in the model. Further, they found no association between incarceration and all-cause mortality for women, nor were there effects of incarceration on deaths from substance abuse, accidents, homicides, or suicides. In a study of incarceration and premature mortality using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79), Massoglia et al. (2014) found differential effects by gender. In their sample, women who had been incarcerated were approximately 2.5 times more likely to die prematurely than women who had not been incarcerated. However, incarceration had no effect on premature mortality for men. This stronger effect for women is consistent with the findings from Spaulding et al. (2011).

Finally, Dirkzwager et al. (2012) studied the effects of first-time incarceration on postprison mortality over a 25-year period among a representative group of over 2,000 Dutch offenders who were convicted in 1977. Their findings were equivocal. Results showed that those who had been incarcerated were significantly more likely to die during the follow-up period when compared with the general population (OR=3.21) and with a group of convicted offenders who had not been incarcerated (OR=1.47). After applying propensity score analysis, however, the matched formerly incarcerated group was not at a significantly greater risk of death than the matched control group (OR=1.40; 95% confidence interval: 0.95–2.07). Thus, only a handful of studies have examined incarceration and premature mortality with a long-term follow-up, and the inconsistent findings suggest further research is required before strong conclusions can be drawn.

PATHWAYS LINKING INCARCERATION TO NEGATIVE EFFECTS ON HEALTH
Space limitations preclude us from discussing all possible pathways that explain why incarceration may have negative effects on health. Therefore, we focus our discussion on the potential explanations that have received the most attention in the sociological literature.

Exposure to Infectious Diseases
Although many inmates with an infectious disease entered correctional facilities with the infection, the prison places inmates at a disproportionate risk of acquiring infectious diseases such as tuberculosis, hepatitis, HIV, sexually transmitted infections, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (Maruschak 2008). Approximately 25% of US inmates have latent tuberculosis infection, which is 6 to 10 times higher compared with the general population (Bick 2007). Approximately 17% of inmates have hepatitis C compared with approximately 2% of the general population, with the prison population housing nearly 30% of all hepatitis C cases in the United States (Varan et al. 2014). Compared with approximately 0.3% of the general population, approximately 1.5% of inmates are HIV positive (Maruschak 2012). As in the general population, cases of hepatitis C and HIV in the incarcerated population declined considerably between 2000 and 2010. The disproportionate exposure to infectious diseases for inmates occurs in the context of a prison environment with efficient conditions for disease transmission: overcrowding; poor ventilation; poor nutrition; shared hygiene facilities; shared personal hygiene items such as soap and razors; poor health care; delayed diagnosis; lack of expertise in infection control; prohibitions against effective harm reduction techniques such as use of condoms; and practices such as amateur tattooing and piercing, unprotected sex, and use of unsterilized drug injection equipment. Contracting a disease while in prison increases the chances of ill health upon release and, in the case of tuberculosis, hepatitis C, and HIV, increases the risk of premature mortality.

Incarceration as an Acute and Chronic Stressor
Incarceration is an acute stressor. Imprisonment is a major life event that requires dramatic changes in a short period across a number of life circumstances (Massoglia 2008a). Research shows such events cause considerable stress, which can have negative repercussions for health (Thoits 1995, Wheaton 1994). Incarceration is also a chronic stressor (Pearlin 1989). Imprisonment can last for years, adding chronic stress to the initial acute shock. Daily stressors in prison can include lack of privacy, overcrowded conditions, antagonistic relationships with guards and inmates, witnessing violence, and the threat of violent victimization. Upon release from prison, former inmates must deal with enduring stressors such as social stigma and the disruption of social bonds such as employment and relationships with family and friends.

Research consistently shows that stress is negatively associated with health. Exposure to repeated or chronic stressors increases allostatic load, which can lead to negative health outcomes (McEwen & Stellar 1993). The psychoneuroimmunology literature, for example, reveals that chronic stress is associated with immune dysfunction (Glaser & Kiecolt-Glaser 2005), and research shows that chronic exposure to hostile conditions—a staple of prison life—is associated with immune dysfunction that can last for long periods. According to Pridemore (2014, p. 217), this “stress-induced immune dysfunction perversely increases the inmate's vulnerability at precisely the time when exposure to infectious diseases is greatest, during imprisonment.” Beyond the confines of the prison, Schnittker & John (2007) found evidence suggesting the enduring social stigma of imprisonment mediates the association between incarceration and health, and Massoglia (2008a) found that former prisoners had increased risks of (a) being medically diagnosed with stress-related illnesses such as psychological problems, hypertension, and heart disease, and (b) self-reporting stress-related conditions such as chest pain and depression.

Incarceration as an Impediment to Social Integration
Incarceration is extremely disruptive to social integration and prosocial bonds. First, imprisonment makes it difficult to maintain stable family and friendship networks. The stigma attached to those who have been incarcerated makes them less desirable partners (Wilson 1987) and they have lower marriage rates following imprisonment (Huebner 2005). Individuals married at the time of incarceration have a greater risk of divorce both during and after imprisonment (Apel et al. 2010, Massoglia et al. 2011). Siennick et al. (2014) found that such marriages are at increased risk of poor marital quality, relationship violence, and extramarital sex and that these factors explain approximately 40% of the association between incarceration and divorce. Second, in many instances daily prison life requires social and psychological adaptations that make it difficult to reintegrate into the community and to develop and maintain healthy friendships following release (Braman 2004).

Third, the effects of incarceration on employment and earnings are varied but substantial. Experimental evidence shows that employers are biased against hiring former inmates (Pager 2003), and in their sample of Dutch offenders Ramakers et al. (2014) found a dose-response relationship between length of incarceration and poor employment prospects. Ex-inmates have limited access to career-oriented occupations and thus are often relegated to undesirable jobs with low wages, poor benefits, and no health insurance. Incarceration is associated with lower earnings growth over one's employment career (Sampson & Laub 1993) and with a wage penalty of 10–30% (Western et al. 2001). Western (2002) found the impact of incarceration on wage mobility so strong and the prevalence of imprisonment among black men so high, he concluded that incarceration is partially responsible for aggregate-level ethnic wage inequality in the United States. In short, incarceration is a major turning point in the life course and is remarkably disruptive for social integration (Sampson & Laub 2003).

Social integration and prosocial bonds, including education, marriage, social support, employment, and income, provide protective effects against morbidity and mortality. Marriage has long been associated with better health and increased longevity, especially for men (Verbrugge 1979). Using the same data from a case-control study of Russian men that showed an association between incarceration and premature mortality (Pridemore 2014), Pridemore et al. (2010) found that marriage and education were inversely associated with the risk of premature mortality. Declines in perceived health and physical functioning are slowed by full-time employment (Ross & Mirowsky 1995) and income is inversely associated with both morbidity and mortality (Backlund et al. 1996, Ecob & Davey Smith 1999). Given these findings, Pridemore (2014) argued that social integration and prosocial bonds likely play key mediating roles in the relationship between incarceration and premature mortality.

LIMITATIONS OF RESEARCH ON INCARCERATION AND HEALTH
Data
There are several limitations to prior research on incarceration and health. One of the most pressing issues in this area is data scarcity. A few data sets, for instance, the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and 1997, and the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, have been the source of data for a great deal of research in the area. Each data set has different strengths and weaknesses and scholars have been successful in moving the field forward using each, but a common thread permeates them: All are secondary data designed to study other phenomena and social processes. Given this, it becomes challenging to adequately address important issues such as selection effects (see below).

Data limitations in this area also impact the most basic aspects of research: the dependent and independent variables. Data on incarceration are comparatively scarce and there is considerable variation in how incarceration is operationalized. Some studies operationalize incarceration as a short period in a jail, others as imprisonment of over a year, and others as lifetime prevalence of incarceration. Although each of these measures has potential strengths and weaknesses, it is necessary to move research toward greater conceptual clarity on the treatment variable and to consider how different operationalizations of incarceration might condition findings. Similar problems can often plague the outcome variables. Studies thus far commonly employ different operationalizations of health, making it difficult to compare results. Finally, perhaps most pressing is the need for longitudinal measures of health outcomes. We know inmates have more health problems than noninmates do, but moving toward causal claims places greater demands on the data, including repeated measures over time that allow scholars to employ a full range of analytical approaches.

Proper Comparison Groups
We know that inmates have increased medical problems compared with the general population (Binswanger et al. 2009), but absent more information it remains unclear whether differences are a function of incarceration or of characteristics that are related both to health and to the likelihood of incarceration. Thus, with whom we compare (ex-)inmates is of paramount importance. Much work, including some of ours, compares inmates with noninmates after adjusting for a number of covariates. Although data limitations often prevent more fine-grained comparative analysis, the problems of covariate adjustment for causal inferences are well known. Although within-person change models, often termed fixed-effects or individual trajectory models, offer the most stringent tests of the incarceration–health relationship, such analyses demand longitudinal data with repeated measures that are often lacking in this area of research. In cases in which data limitations prevent such analysis, a fruitful comparison group might be individuals convicted of a crime but not incarcerated. Compared with the general population, this group of convicted but nonincarcerated felons is more similar to the incarcerated population and thus might be a more appropriate comparison group. Regardless of the specific focus, as research in the area moves forward, increased attention to the appropriate comparison groups is required.

Selection Effects
One of the most pressing issues facing the research on incarceration and heath is potential bias from selection effects. As Johnson & Easterling argued (2012, p. 342),

Despite what appears to be converging evidence that parental incarceration poses a significant threat to child development, this area of inquiry has yet to overcome important methodological and conceptual challenges related to selection bias. It is therefore unclear whether the difficulties that have been observed among children whose parents are incarcerated are due to the incarceration itself or to other adversities that children have experienced.
Although others have offered a thoughtful and systematic response to such critiques (Wildeman et al. 2013), our point is a basic one: Given how closely the correlates of incarceration map over the determinants of poor heath, scholars must pay particular attention to potential bias from selection effects and employ rigorous analytical methods and careful research designs to address it. Absent such careful consideration, this area of research remains open to critiques of selection bias. For instance, inmates may have poorer health profiles because of a history of drug use rather than incarceration itself. Along similar lines, perhaps the appearance of an effect of parental incarceration on children's health is actually a product of parental absenteeism, or maybe the apparent effect of incarceration on individual health is a product of earnings inequality or of individual or family characteristics early in life that increase the chances both of incarceration and of poor health. Although some research in the area has begun to address these important critiques, future research meant to estimate the precise magnitude of the impact of incarceration on individual, family, and community health must recognize the potential bias of selection effects.

AN AGENDA FOR FUTURE RESEARCH ON THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN INCARCERATION AND HEALTH
Although research on incarceration and health has rapidly grown in recent years, many important substantive and methodological items remain to be addressed. Although our suggestions are not exhaustive, we propose several important considerations for the scientific record as researchers move forward in understanding this relationship. One area that appears ripe for additional inquiry is the treatment variable. The literature takes a fairly broad view of the term incarceration. Without giving preference to one over the other, some data sets appear to capture more invasive spells of imprisonment, whereas others might capture just a few days in jail (e.g., see collection protocol differences between the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997). According to recent data, the average sentence in state prisons is slightly over 4 years, with offenders serving roughly half of the sentence. In contrast, most spells in jail are less than 3 days, and many people who spend a few nights in jail are ultimately not convicted of any crime. Given these diverse treatments, future work should investigate whether these different types and lengths of correctional confinement produce divergent effects (Massoglia & Warner 2011).

A related line of inquiry might examine how different levels of confinement—for example, minimum versus maximum security—might be associated with differences in and severity of adverse health outcomes. In addition, work has not considered whether there is state or regional variation in the incarceration–health relationship. It may be, for instance, that states with more integrative postrelease policies have better health outcomes. Along similar lines, although the United States is the world leader in terms of incarceration, comparative sociologically oriented work on incarceration and health is relatively sparse (Pridemore 2014). The field would surely be advanced if scholars brought more comparative approaches to this area. For example, incarceration may still affect health even in nations with lower incarceration rates and shorter sentence lengths. Yet research could examine, for instance, whether cultural differences across nations likely influence the structure of prisons and the experience of incarceration, both of which could affect any impact of incarceration on health (and of course on other collateral consequences of incarceration).

Research should also move toward a focus on the causal mechanisms linking incarceration to poor health outcomes. Thus far, research has done a better job showing that incarceration matters rather than why incarceration matters. A great deal of research discusses stress and stigma. Both potential mechanisms have pragmatic appeal and research in both criminology and medical sociology suggests they are appropriate explanatory mechanisms. To date, however, precise specifications of the causal pathways linking these and related factors to health have been elusive. Such causal pathways to poor health outcomes are notoriously difficult to model, but as this research area matures, identifying causal mechanisms must progress.

Greater research on female (ex-)inmates would also advance the field. To date, much of the work in the area has excluded female offenders. This omission is notable for a number of reasons. First, although much smaller, the size of the female incarcerated population is growing far faster than the size of the male population. Second, female inmates have a different set of risk factors across a number of areas—drug use, relationship history, history of abuse—that are likely linked to health outcomes (see Lindquist & Lindquist 1997). Third, compared with men, women have a different set of health needs, suggesting that the incarceration experience may differentially impact women's health. The research of Massoglia et al. (2014) and Spaulding et al. (2011) provides evidence not only that the health consequences of incarceration are different for men and women but that the negative effects may be stronger for women, at least on some outcomes. Given the differences between male and female offenders, a sustained and focused inquiry into potential gender differences in the incarceration–health relationship seems particularly timely.

As research on the incarceration–health relationship moves forward, two other related substantive avenues for future research are important. At first view each avenue appears somewhat counterintuitive. This research area would be well served if future research considered the potential positive impact of incarceration on health at both the individual and community levels. Although research has clearly demonstrated a negative impact of incarceration on individual health across a variety of outcomes, other work has demonstrated differential effects of incarceration on family life (Wildeman & Turney 2014), and a consideration of the potentially positive impact of incarceration on health is warranted for a number of reasons.

At the individual level, on average persons who are incarcerated often are drawn disproportionately from a disadvantaged background. Given less access to health care and the generally poorer health status of those from these disadvantaged backgrounds, the correctional institution may provide inmates with opportunities to improve their health. The correctional setting provides some inmates better access to fundamental health needs such as nutrition and a place to sleep that is heated and dry. Aside from these most basic health requirements, which surely are not met for some of these individuals outside of prison, the institution removes some individuals from destructive social environments that may include high levels of drug use and, particularly for women, a history of physical abuse. Removing individuals from such environments might provide some health benefits. Finally, although often lacking in several respects, health care provisions in prisons may represent a dramatic improvement over the care (if any) some inmates receive outside prison. In short, due to the extremely disadvantaged background from which many inmates are drawn, there is a rationale for exploring the possibility of a positive, even if short-term or limited, impact of incarceration on the individual health of some inmates. Our review reveals evidence of such potential short- and long-term positive effects of incarceration on health (Mumola 2007; Patterson 2010; Rosen et al. 2011, 2008). This is a sensitive topic, and obviously the policy response is not to increase incarceration in hopes of better health outcomes. The results are intriguing, however, and if they hold up, they will serve as a stark indicator of the generally poor health care provided to this segment of the population. Further, they would suggest the importance of better education about and more careful planning for postrelease health care and for more rational policies for sharing medical data with parole officers, social workers, and others tasked with aiding prisoners upon release.

Similarly, the prison may produce other types of health benefits, in particular for treatable diseases. Again the potential benefits stem from the reality of the marginal or nonexistent health care inmates have on the outside, and at the aggregate level it is important to consider the remarkable expansion and size of the penal system. Correctional facilities offer an opportunity to impact the health profile of a large and underserved aspect of the community. Many state prison systems screen for and treat communicable diseases. For specific diseases or infections for which treatment can cure an illness or provide lasting improvement in health functioning, correctional facilities offer the potential to improve individual health and aggregate health inequities. For instance, because data indicate that a large number of individuals with treatable sexually transmitted infections are passing through correctional facilities, screening and treatment in prisons could not only improve individual health but also reduce the prevalence of infections in the general community. In short, given the high levels of inequality and health disparities characteristic of American society at both the individual and community levels, it could be fruitful to investigate how the penal system could produce some improvements in health outcomes.

A paramount item to address in future research is data collection and research design. To this point nearly all studies of the incarceration–health association employed secondary data. This approach presents important methodological and theoretical challenges. Methodologically, for example, many of these studies are vulnerable to selection bias. Theoretically, these data sets do not allow us to test several important hypotheses about the incarceration–health association because data collection was undertaken to answer other questions. Now that there is strong evidence that incarceration has consequences for individual, family, and community health, it is time to undertake large-scale projects that focus specifically on this association. These projects would involve original data collection aimed at and research designs capable of answering the most poignant theoretical questions now being posed in this research area. This type of original data collection would allow us to (a) address methodological limitations such as selection effects, (b) determine whether the health effects of incarceration are causal or spurious, and (c) undertake tests of theory capable of discovering the direct, indirect, and conditional causal pathways through which incarceration influences health.

Finally, our review is notable for what fell outside our specific scope of inquiry. For example, space limitations prevented us from systematically reviewing the rapidly expanding literature on the impact of incarceration on mental health outcomes.2 Similar to the literature on physical health, the literature on the mental health consequences of incarceration considers the impact on both inmates (Schnittker et al. 2012) and family members of those who are incarcerated (Turney et al. 2012, Wildeman et al. 2013). This important line of research is still emerging, and future research focused on clarifying the scope of incarceration's impact on mental health outcomes and the specific mechanisms that produce such effects would advance this research area. Similarly, we were able to only broadly consider how incarceration may disrupt family functioning in ways that are related to a host of developmental and health outcomes for both children and spouses of inmates (see Turney 2015, Turney & Wildeman 2015). Further inquiry into this area is important to determine the breadth and range of the collateral consequences of incarceration and to test the possible causal pathways linking incarceration and health.

CONCLUSION
In the last decade there has been a sustained research focus on the health consequences of incarceration. Sociologists across a range of subfields, including criminology, stratification, life course processes, family functioning, and medical sociology, have undertaken research on the topic. In this review we attempt to summarize this rapidly expanding literature while pointing to areas in which additional research is warranted. Despite the wealth of articles published in recent years, research in the area is still at its nascent stages, as is—from a historical context—our understanding of the penal system and its effects on society. As the number of individuals released from prison grows, and as they advance in age, research on the relationship between incarceration and health will continue to speak to a host of critical academic, social, and policy issues. To that end, we view the important work to date as a starting point for future research in the area.

        Given the text identify a series of relationships between variables that have a well defined positive direction and a clear textual backing.
        For example, if a text says "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate" would be good variables. Variables that are implied but not directly stated by the text such as "education infilstructure" should not be included. 
        The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 
        or 'inconclusive'. The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
        The SupportText field of your output should include a section of verbatim from the text in addition to any comments you want to make about your output.
        Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices.

        The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "isCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "isCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```
        


Input begins:

        Abstract
The expansion of the penal system has been one of the most dramatic trends in contemporary American society. A wealth of research has examined the impact of incarceration on a range of later life outcomes and has considered how the penal system has emerged as a mechanism of stratification and inequality in the United States. In this article, we review the literature from a comparatively new vein of this research: the impact of incarceration on health outcomes. We first consider the impact of incarceration on a range of individual outcomes, from chronic health conditions to mortality. We then consider outcomes beyond the individual, including the health of family members and community health outcomes. Next, we discuss mechanisms linking incarceration and health outcomes before closing with a consideration of limitations in the field and directions for future research.

Keywords
incarceration, health, mortality, inequality, stress

INTRODUCTION
This article reviews the sociological literature on the effects of incarceration on health, focusing specifically on physical morbidity and mortality. During the last four decades the American penal system grew at an unprecedented rate. The incarceration rate, which was roughly stable for 50 years prior to 1975, increased approximately fivefold since 1975 (Pettit & Western 2004). More than six million US residents are now or have been incarcerated and there are over 17 million felons or ex-felons in the United States. These numbers demonstrate the massive size of the penal system, and the current felon population is approximately six times larger than it was in 1970 (Uggen et al. 2006). Although the expansion of the penal system has affected all demographic groups, the impact was most acute for disadvantaged minorities and minority communities, for which rates of incarceration are five to eight times higher than rates for similarly situated whites (Pettit & Western 2004).

The penal system grew so large and so rapidly it now draws comparisons to the American system of higher education. Each year approximately as many men graduate college as are released from prison (Knapp et al. 2008), and the size of the incarcerated population (Glaze & Parks 2012) is approximately the same as the enrollment at all American research universities (Snyder & Dillow 2010). Given this rapid expansion and the wide swath the penal system cuts through American society, some argue incarceration is now a phase in the life course for some population subgroups (Pettit & Western 2004) and that correctional policies have created a new felon class in American society (Uggen et al. 2006).

This remarkable growth produced a groundswell of research highlighting the far-reaching consequences of incarceration. For example, research illustrates the consequences of incarceration for family functioning, including the mental health of inmates' partners, the behavior of their children, and the impact of incarceration on marital dissolution (Comfort 2007, Goffman 2009, Lopoo & Western 2005, Massoglia et al. 2011, Turney et al. 2012, Western & Wildeman 2009). A related line of research reveals the stratifying impact of incarceration on economic indicators such as childhood poverty and on wages and entrance into the labor market (Pager 2003, Pager et al. 2009, Western 2002, Wildeman 2009). Scholars are becoming increasingly aware of the stratifying impact of incarceration and penal sanctions on a range of social and economic inequalities (Harris et al. 2010, Wakefield & Uggen 2010). Given that the expansion of the penal system has disproportionately impacted minorities (Pettit & Western 2004), it is important to consider whether and to what extent minorities and minority communities disproportionately feel the indirect consequences of the expansion. At least two distinct processes may drive any disproportionate impact of the penal system (Massoglia 2008b). First, as a percentage of the population many more minorities are exposed to the penal system, so even if the effect is the same across different races the aggregate impact will be larger for minority groups. Second, for a variety of reasons the detrimental consequences of incarceration could be felt more strongly by minorities. Thus, the current state of the field shows incarceration has emerged as a mechanism of stratification in American society and contributes to racial inequality.

Against this backdrop, the impact of incarceration on health outcomes and inequalities has received considerable attention, and in this article we review this body of research. We begin by discussing the general association between incarceration and individual health functioning. From there, we expand our scope and consider the impact of incarceration on family and neighborhood indicators of health. Next, we discuss the literature on the association between incarceration and mortality. Following that, we consider whether incarceration may have health benefits for some demographic groups. We then discuss the key potential sociological explanations for the relationship between incarceration and health. We conclude by discussing some of the limitations of the research on incarceration and health and then outline an agenda for future research in the incarceration–health tradition.

INCARCERATION AND MORBIDITY
Individual Health
A number of studies have examined the relationship between incarceration and a range of individual-level health outcomes. Some of the most innovative research in this area leveraged longitudinal data to examine within-person change in health status after a period of incarceration. Schnittker & John (2007), for example, focused on within-person change using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79). Three findings from this important paper set the stage for later sociological work in the area. First, the authors found that individuals with a history of incarceration report more chronic health problems after their period of incarceration than before. Second, the authors accounted for chronic health problems prior to prison, which allowed them to demonstrate empirically that incarceration is associated with a negative change in health status. Third, Schnittker & John found that the impact of the length of incarceration on health appears to be less important than the fact of incarceration itself.

Other works utilizing the same data set (NLSY) reached similar conclusions. For example, Massoglia (2008a) found that incarceration is correlated with lower self-reported health and that having been incarcerated was more consequential than the length of incarceration. Similarly, using the same data set, Massoglia (2008b) found that relative to those who had not been incarcerated, those who had been incarcerated disproportionately suffer from infectious diseases (e.g., hepatitis, tuberculosis) and stress-related illness.

Other studies looked at different aspects of health and considered the potential impact of incarceration. For example, obesity is a socially patterned epidemic with higher prevalence among those of lower socioeconomic status and among ethnic/racial minorities. For instance, Houle (2014) investigated how incarceration might contribute to patterns of obesity. The author examined trajectories of body mass index (BMI) and found that being incarcerated increases BMI. The effects varied, however, with strongest effects for blacks and for individuals with less education. In the conclusion the author echoed a common theme across many studies in the area: Given the disproportionate rates of incarceration, and the stronger effects for blacks, the penal system may condition the structure of obesity disparities across the life course (Houle 2014).1

FAMILY, NEIGHBORHOOD, AND POPULATION HEALTH
An emerging literature examines the detrimental impact of incarceration on family, neighborhood, and population health. The impact of incarceration on health, including mental health (Wildeman et al. 2012), extends to family members (including partners and children) of those who are incarcerated (Wakefield & Wildeman 2013, Wildeman & Muller 2012). Roettger & Boardman (2012) used the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health to investigate the impact of parental incarceration on childhood body mass. Using multiple analytic approaches and accounting for several potentially confounding factors such as stressful life events and individual and family characteristics, the authors found that parental incarceration is associated with increased body mass among female, but not male, children of those who were incarcerated.

Lee et al. (2014) also found that results vary by gender. Having a family member incarcerated increased the likelihood of women to experience a heart attack, stroke, or obesity or to have fair to poor health. There was no relationship found among males who had a family member incarcerated. This study revealed that the incarceration of a family member has implications for women's cardiovascular health and, consistent with other literature in the area, that incarceration contributes to overall racial disparities in health. Given the current data limitations of studying incarceration and health, this study is also notable because it utilized the National Survey of American Life, a cross-sectional, nationally representative study.

The Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study is one of the most widely used data sets to study the effects of incarceration on families (see Wildeman & Western 2010). What becomes clear from fragile families, and is relevant for understanding the health problems associated with incarceration, is that the families most likely to be affected by incarceration are often disadvantaged socially, residentially, and economically. That is, the families most likely to experience incarceration are already at risk for problematic outcomes, including poor health.

In contrast to other research that focuses on the direct effects of incarceration on health outcomes, many of the harmful effects of incarceration on children's health operate indirectly through other mechanisms, including family processes (Arditti et al. 2003, Waller & Swisher 2006), relationships among partners (Comfort 2008), changes in economic well-being (Geller et al. 2011, Schwartz-Soicher et al. 2011), or educational performance (Cho 2009a,b). In short, paternal incarceration affects child health through its detrimental impact on family and attainment processes important to children's health, such as educational, labor market, and residential attainment.

In a comprehensive treatment of the topic, Wakefield & Wildeman (2013) concluded incarceration has wide-ranging effects on childhood health and well-being, including increasing mental health and behavioral problems. Because the risk of paternal incarceration is much higher for black children than for white children, Wakefield & Wildeman (2011, 2013) concluded that parental incarceration is an important contributor to racial disparities in childhood health and well-being.

Parental incarceration also leads to poor health outcomes by increasing the likelihood that children will adopt behaviors associated with poor health. For instance, parental incarceration is associated with behavioral problems in children (Geller et al. 2011; Murray et al. 2012a,b), including physical aggression (Wildeman 2010) and criminality (Roettger & Swisher 2011). Parental incarceration also leads to increased drug and alcohol use among children, which has obvious implications for the health of children (Roettger et al. 2011). Research also suggests maternal incarceration may have stronger negative effects on children than paternal incarceration does (Murray & Farrington 2008).

Turney (2014) provides an insightful and timely bridge between family health outcomes and larger community and population health outcomes. Even after accounting for an array of relevant factors, Turney found an independent impact of incarceration on outcomes ranging from behavior and conduct problems to developmental delays. She concluded that children's health disadvantages are an overlooked consequence of incarceration, arguing that proliferation of stress across generations is a mechanism by which parental incarceration influences the health of children. Perhaps more importantly, Turney suggested that given its unequal distribution across different demographic groups in the population, incarceration may have implications for population-level class and ethnic inequalities in children's health.

Turney's findings are consistent with research that documents many detrimental effects of incarceration on community and public health (see discussion in Massoglia & Schnittker 2009). One such study used state-level panel data stretching almost 25 years and found an association between incarceration and poorer population health. This association is strongest for infant mortality and female life expectancy (Wildeman 2012). Another study examined the relationship between incarceration and infection rates of immunodeficiency syndromes (Johnson & Raphael 2009). The authors found that incarceration had a significant effect on AIDS infection rates for both males and females and concluded that a large proportion of the racial disparities in AIDS infections among black women can be explained by higher incarceration rates among black men (Johnson & Raphael 2009). One compelling aspect of this study is its use of data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and case-level US data spanning the period 1982–1996, making it both longitudinal and representative.

INCARCERATION AND MORTALITY
Mortality During Incarceration
Studies examining mortality within the prison and comparing within-prison mortality with that of the general population are rare. Mumola (2007) used national-level data to summarize within-prison mortality and compare it with the rates for the US resident population. Although his comparisons between the two populations were not adjusted for differences in age and sex, the results are telling. There were approximately 3,000 deaths per year in US prisons between 2001 and 2004, corresponding to an average annual mortality rate of 250 per 100,000 prisoners. Eighty-nine percent of prison deaths were due to internal causes, with suicide (6% of all deaths) the only external cause in the 10 leading causes of death among prisoners. Other external causes such as homicide, alcohol/drug overdose, and accidental injury comprised 2%, 1%, and 1% of deaths, respectively. The leading causes of death were heart disease (annual rate of 68 per 100,000 prisoners) and cancer (58 per 100,000), followed by liver diseases (25 per 100,000), AIDS (18 per 100,000), and suicide (15 per 100,000). Approximately two-thirds of all deaths, including over 90% of all AIDS-related deaths, resulted from conditions that existed when the inmate entered prison. There was substantial state-level variation in the mortality rate due to internal causes among those incarcerated: the rate in Louisiana, Tennessee, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and Kentucky was approximately three times higher than the rate in Utah, North Dakota, Iowa, Alaska, and Vermont.

In a study of mortality among Texas male inmates between 1992 and 2003, Harzke et al. (2011) found the leading causes of death to be infections, cancer, and cardiovascular disease. Sixty-nine percent of deaths due to infection were caused by AIDS, though as shown in other analyses the inmate death rate due to infection declined substantially over time. Nevertheless, after adjusting for age and race, the authors found that annual mortality rates due to infection were still two to three times higher in the incarcerated population than in the general population of Texas. Inmate deaths due to cardiovascular diseases also dropped sharply over this period, as did deaths due to cancer and liver disease, leading the authors to conclude that changes in health care in the Texas prison system over time—including improvements in screening protocols, in infirmary and outpatient capacity, and in specialty care—may have been responsible for the declines.

Using data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics and the Census Bureau for the period 1985–1998, Patterson (2010) compared sex- and ethnic-specific mortality rates for prisoners and nonprisoners aged 18–65. Although most studies focus on men, Patterson found incarceration to have stronger effects on female mortality than on male mortality. Her results also showed white male prisoners experienced significantly higher death rates than white male nonprisoners did. Using data on men aged 20–79 in North Carolina for the period 1995–2005, Rosen et al. (2011) compared mortality rates of prisoners with those of nonprisoners. The all-cause standardized mortality ratio (SMR) for white inmates was 1.12, with more deaths than expected from HIV and viral hepatitis infections, liver disease, cancer, and respiratory disease. In a retrospective cohort study, Spaulding et al. (2011) examined all persons in Georgia prisons on June 30, 1991, to determine their survivability through the end of 2006. As with prior studies, the authors found white men were at a substantially higher risk for mortality (SMR=1.28) while incarcerated than when not incarcerated. The results of these studies suggest white men are at an increased risk of mortality when living in prison than when not living in prison, and that this risk is driven largely by deaths due to infectious diseases, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. The findings, however, are different for black men.

Does Incarceration Reduce Mortality Among Black Men?
In spite of the growing body of research demonstrating the negative health implications of incarceration, there is increasing evidence that incarceration has a protective effect on mortality rates for black men. Using national-level data, Mumola (2007) found that the mortality rate for black male prisoners aged 15–64 was 19% lower than that for black men in the general population. This was driven, however, by differences in ethnic-specific mortality rates. Incarcerated whites and Hispanics had mortality rates slightly above those for the corresponding groups in the general population, whereas the mortality rate for incarcerated blacks was 57% lower than the rate for blacks in the general population. Patterson's (2010) results also revealed that the substantial inequality in mortality rates for blacks and whites in the general population largely disappeared in the incarcerated population. She found that whereas the within-prison mortality rate for white males was higher than the rate for white males in the general population, the within-prison mortality rate for black males was considerably lower than the rate for black males in the general population. Similarly, using standardized mortality ratios to compare death rates of males in North Carolina prisons with expected death rates based on state residents, Rosen et al. (2011) found 48% fewer deaths than expected among black prisoners.

Why might incarceration protect black males against mortality? First, the controlled prison environment can protect against external causes of death, such as violence and transport accidents, that are high among young black males in the general population (Patterson 2010, Rosen et al. 2011), especially because those incarcerated are probably among the most at risk of death from these causes. Second, low-income black males of all ages may benefit from the availability of healthcare in prison, which would be largely either inaccessible or unused outside prison. Patterson (2010), for example, found that the differential mortality rate between incarcerated and nonincarcerated young black men was not entirely accounted for when firearm and motor vehicle deaths were removed from the general population comparison group. Further, Rosen et al. (2011) found that not only traumatic but also chronic causes of deaths such as cardiovascular disease and cancer were lower than expected among incarcerated black males. Chronic causes of death are more common to an older population. Thus, the food, shelter, and especially medical care provided in prison may protect black males against mortality. The hypothesis of better health care for blacks inside prison relative to outside prison received further evidence from another study by Rosen et al. (2008), who found fewer than expected all-cause deaths and deaths from chronic disorders among black former inmates. The authors of these studies concluded that different aspects of the prison environment, both environmental controls and provision of services, equalize the ethnic mortality disparities outside prison.

Another study, however, suggests an alternative explanation. The practice of compassionate release, i.e., releasing inmates who are in particularly poor health and close to death, is not uncommon in some states. Compassionate release reduces the mortality rate of the incarcerated population and increases the mortality rate of the comparable resident population. In their study of mortality among current and former Georgia prisoners, Spaulding et al. (2011) initially found a substantially lower mortality rate among incarcerated black men relative to nonincarcerated black men. After controlling for the compassionate release of moribund prisoners, however, the effect disappeared. Thus, although environmental controls of the prison may protect against external causes of death for young black men, findings indicating that health care is better for incarcerated black men may stem from an artifact of end-of-life prison policies, and more research is required before definitive conclusions can be drawn.

MORTALITY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING RELEASE FROM PRISON
The majority of studies of incarceration and postrelease mortality examined short-term effects. Analyses conducted in several nations consistently revealed the period immediately following release from prison to be extremely dangerous for ex-inmates (Bird & Hutchinson 2003; Farrell & Marsden 2008; Graham 2003; Kariminia et al. 2007a,b; Pratt et al. 2006; Seaman et al. 1998). Binswanger et al. (2007) undertook a retrospective cohort study of all inmates released from the Washington State Department of Corrections between 1999 and 2003, and compared their mortality rates with those in the state population. Adjusting for age, sex, and ethnicity, the mortality rate for recently released inmates during the entire follow-up period was 777 per 100,000 person-years, which was 3.5 times higher than the rate for the general population. In the first two weeks following release, the death rate was nearly 2,600 per 100,000 person-years, or approximately 13 times higher than the rate for the general population. The authors' finding of a considerable mortality risk in the first two weeks following release from custody is consistent with results from other studies of both prisons (Bird & Hutchinson 2003, Kariminia et al. 2007b, Krinsky et al. 2009, Seaman et al. 1998, Verger et al. 2003) and jails (Lim et al. 2012).

By a wide margin, the leading cause of death for ex-inmates during the immediate postrelease period is drug overdose. Additional leading causes of death during this time include external causes such as homicide and suicide. During this period deaths due to drug overdose are likely the result of several factors related to (a) the behavior of the individual, including polydrug use (especially involving opioids) and decreased physiological tolerance during a period of little or no use while incarcerated, and (b) the interaction between the individual and the criminal justice system, including the failure to properly identify those most at risk, improper or absent prerelease planning and counseling, and little or no provision of health care or follow-up after release (Møller et al. 2010). Further studies are required to determine which characteristics put ex-inmates most at risk of death, not only from drug overdose (Binswanger et al. 2011, Møller et al. 2010) but also from other preventable causes such as homicide and suicide (Pratt et al. 2006), during this period.

LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF INCARCERATION ON MORTALITY
Although fewer studies examined the long-term impact of incarceration on mortality, this is an important exercise because it allows scholars to determine whether any effects of incarceration on morbidity translate to early mortality, whether incarceration increases the risk of premature mortality from internal and chronic causes of death relative to the external and acute causes of death, and whether ex-inmates are at a higher risk of death immediately following release. The results from studies showing the long-term effects of incarceration on mortality are less consistent than those showing short-term effects.

Some studies found an association between incarceration and mortality. In an analysis that linked prison and state death records in North Carolina over a 25-year period, Rosen et al. (2008) used SMRs to compare the mortality of male ex-inmates aged 20–69 with that of other state residents. Although all-cause mortality was higher among ex-prisoners than among other state residents, there were large differences by ethnicity. The all-cause SMRs were 2.08 for whites and 1.03 for blacks (though the latter effect was small, it was statistically significant). The authors found that former inmates had higher-than-expected mortality from homicides, accidents, substance use, HIV, liver disease, and liver cancer. Spaulding et al. (2011) linked prison and death records and estimated SMRs to examine mortality among the cohort of all persons incarcerated in Georgia state prisons on June 30, 1991, through 2006. They found positive and significant SMRs for all ex-inmates and for sex- and ethnic-specific ex-inmate groups. Again, however, SMRs were larger for whites (2.12) than for blacks (1.32). The authors included women in their study and found that SMRs were larger for women (2.56) than for men (1.51). The authors' results revealed that HIV, cancer, cirrhosis, homicide, transport accidents, and overdoses accounted for nearly two-thirds of the excess mortality among former prisoners.

Utilizing data from a large-scale population-based case-control study of Russian men aged 25–54 and controlling for the known causes of premature mortality among this group, Pridemore (2014) estimated mortality odds ratios to examine the association between incarceration and premature mortality. He found that, relative to men who had not been incarcerated, men who had been incarcerated were more than twice as likely to die prematurely. Comparing the age-adjusted odds of specific causes of death of decedent men who had been incarcerated with those of decedent men who had not been incarcerated, the author found the former were more likely to die from infectious diseases (OR=3.10), drug overdose (OR=2.32), homicide (OR=1.99), and respiratory disease (OR=1.79). Patterson (2013) used data from New York state to study the impact of incarceration length on postprison mortality. Her results showed that each additional year in prison produced a nearly 16% increase in the odds of death and a two-year decline in life expectancy. Thus, for someone 30 years old five years in prison would increase the odds of death by approximately 80% and result in a loss in life expectancy of approximately 10 years. As with other studies she found the risk of mortality was highest immediately following release from prison, with the time to recovery equal to approximately two-thirds of the time served in prison. Patterson concluded that incarceration length has a direct impact on life expectancy.

Other evidence suggests incarceration has no long-term effect on mortality. First, although the studies described above have longer-term follow-up periods, they include deaths from the time immediately following release from prison. These deaths may be driving any association found between incarceration and premature mortality, especially because we know many of the excess deaths in these studies of long-term effects resulted from the same causes of death common in studies of mortality during the immediate postrelease period, including drug overdose, homicide, and suicide. Similarly, although Patterson (2013) found that the length of incarceration has dramatic effects on the odds of death and on life expectancy, she also found (a) that return to baseline odds of death occurred after approximately two-thirds of the individual's incarceration length and (b) that 70% of the individuals in her sample were incarcerated less than two years and 86% less than three years.

Second, some studies reveal no association between incarceration and premature mortality. For example, Kjelsberg & Laake (2010) examined all-cause and cause-specific mortality among Norwegian male and female convicted offenders, some of whom had experienced incarceration and some of whom had not. Whereas the unadjusted odds ratio for incarceration was significantly associated with all-cause mortality for men, it was nonsignificant when adjusted for the other variables in the model. Further, they found no association between incarceration and all-cause mortality for women, nor were there effects of incarceration on deaths from substance abuse, accidents, homicides, or suicides. In a study of incarceration and premature mortality using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79), Massoglia et al. (2014) found differential effects by gender. In their sample, women who had been incarcerated were approximately 2.5 times more likely to die prematurely than women who had not been incarcerated. However, incarceration had no effect on premature mortality for men. This stronger effect for women is consistent with the findings from Spaulding et al. (2011).

Finally, Dirkzwager et al. (2012) studied the effects of first-time incarceration on postprison mortality over a 25-year period among a representative group of over 2,000 Dutch offenders who were convicted in 1977. Their findings were equivocal. Results showed that those who had been incarcerated were significantly more likely to die during the follow-up period when compared with the general population (OR=3.21) and with a group of convicted offenders who had not been incarcerated (OR=1.47). After applying propensity score analysis, however, the matched formerly incarcerated group was not at a significantly greater risk of death than the matched control group (OR=1.40; 95% confidence interval: 0.95–2.07). Thus, only a handful of studies have examined incarceration and premature mortality with a long-term follow-up, and the inconsistent findings suggest further research is required before strong conclusions can be drawn.

PATHWAYS LINKING INCARCERATION TO NEGATIVE EFFECTS ON HEALTH
Space limitations preclude us from discussing all possible pathways that explain why incarceration may have negative effects on health. Therefore, we focus our discussion on the potential explanations that have received the most attention in the sociological literature.

Exposure to Infectious Diseases
Although many inmates with an infectious disease entered correctional facilities with the infection, the prison places inmates at a disproportionate risk of acquiring infectious diseases such as tuberculosis, hepatitis, HIV, sexually transmitted infections, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (Maruschak 2008). Approximately 25% of US inmates have latent tuberculosis infection, which is 6 to 10 times higher compared with the general population (Bick 2007). Approximately 17% of inmates have hepatitis C compared with approximately 2% of the general population, with the prison population housing nearly 30% of all hepatitis C cases in the United States (Varan et al. 2014). Compared with approximately 0.3% of the general population, approximately 1.5% of inmates are HIV positive (Maruschak 2012). As in the general population, cases of hepatitis C and HIV in the incarcerated population declined considerably between 2000 and 2010. The disproportionate exposure to infectious diseases for inmates occurs in the context of a prison environment with efficient conditions for disease transmission: overcrowding; poor ventilation; poor nutrition; shared hygiene facilities; shared personal hygiene items such as soap and razors; poor health care; delayed diagnosis; lack of expertise in infection control; prohibitions against effective harm reduction techniques such as use of condoms; and practices such as amateur tattooing and piercing, unprotected sex, and use of unsterilized drug injection equipment. Contracting a disease while in prison increases the chances of ill health upon release and, in the case of tuberculosis, hepatitis C, and HIV, increases the risk of premature mortality.

Incarceration as an Acute and Chronic Stressor
Incarceration is an acute stressor. Imprisonment is a major life event that requires dramatic changes in a short period across a number of life circumstances (Massoglia 2008a). Research shows such events cause considerable stress, which can have negative repercussions for health (Thoits 1995, Wheaton 1994). Incarceration is also a chronic stressor (Pearlin 1989). Imprisonment can last for years, adding chronic stress to the initial acute shock. Daily stressors in prison can include lack of privacy, overcrowded conditions, antagonistic relationships with guards and inmates, witnessing violence, and the threat of violent victimization. Upon release from prison, former inmates must deal with enduring stressors such as social stigma and the disruption of social bonds such as employment and relationships with family and friends.

Research consistently shows that stress is negatively associated with health. Exposure to repeated or chronic stressors increases allostatic load, which can lead to negative health outcomes (McEwen & Stellar 1993). The psychoneuroimmunology literature, for example, reveals that chronic stress is associated with immune dysfunction (Glaser & Kiecolt-Glaser 2005), and research shows that chronic exposure to hostile conditions—a staple of prison life—is associated with immune dysfunction that can last for long periods. According to Pridemore (2014, p. 217), this “stress-induced immune dysfunction perversely increases the inmate's vulnerability at precisely the time when exposure to infectious diseases is greatest, during imprisonment.” Beyond the confines of the prison, Schnittker & John (2007) found evidence suggesting the enduring social stigma of imprisonment mediates the association between incarceration and health, and Massoglia (2008a) found that former prisoners had increased risks of (a) being medically diagnosed with stress-related illnesses such as psychological problems, hypertension, and heart disease, and (b) self-reporting stress-related conditions such as chest pain and depression.

Incarceration as an Impediment to Social Integration
Incarceration is extremely disruptive to social integration and prosocial bonds. First, imprisonment makes it difficult to maintain stable family and friendship networks. The stigma attached to those who have been incarcerated makes them less desirable partners (Wilson 1987) and they have lower marriage rates following imprisonment (Huebner 2005). Individuals married at the time of incarceration have a greater risk of divorce both during and after imprisonment (Apel et al. 2010, Massoglia et al. 2011). Siennick et al. (2014) found that such marriages are at increased risk of poor marital quality, relationship violence, and extramarital sex and that these factors explain approximately 40% of the association between incarceration and divorce. Second, in many instances daily prison life requires social and psychological adaptations that make it difficult to reintegrate into the community and to develop and maintain healthy friendships following release (Braman 2004).

Third, the effects of incarceration on employment and earnings are varied but substantial. Experimental evidence shows that employers are biased against hiring former inmates (Pager 2003), and in their sample of Dutch offenders Ramakers et al. (2014) found a dose-response relationship between length of incarceration and poor employment prospects. Ex-inmates have limited access to career-oriented occupations and thus are often relegated to undesirable jobs with low wages, poor benefits, and no health insurance. Incarceration is associated with lower earnings growth over one's employment career (Sampson & Laub 1993) and with a wage penalty of 10–30% (Western et al. 2001). Western (2002) found the impact of incarceration on wage mobility so strong and the prevalence of imprisonment among black men so high, he concluded that incarceration is partially responsible for aggregate-level ethnic wage inequality in the United States. In short, incarceration is a major turning point in the life course and is remarkably disruptive for social integration (Sampson & Laub 2003).

Social integration and prosocial bonds, including education, marriage, social support, employment, and income, provide protective effects against morbidity and mortality. Marriage has long been associated with better health and increased longevity, especially for men (Verbrugge 1979). Using the same data from a case-control study of Russian men that showed an association between incarceration and premature mortality (Pridemore 2014), Pridemore et al. (2010) found that marriage and education were inversely associated with the risk of premature mortality. Declines in perceived health and physical functioning are slowed by full-time employment (Ross & Mirowsky 1995) and income is inversely associated with both morbidity and mortality (Backlund et al. 1996, Ecob & Davey Smith 1999). Given these findings, Pridemore (2014) argued that social integration and prosocial bonds likely play key mediating roles in the relationship between incarceration and premature mortality.

LIMITATIONS OF RESEARCH ON INCARCERATION AND HEALTH
Data
There are several limitations to prior research on incarceration and health. One of the most pressing issues in this area is data scarcity. A few data sets, for instance, the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and 1997, and the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, have been the source of data for a great deal of research in the area. Each data set has different strengths and weaknesses and scholars have been successful in moving the field forward using each, but a common thread permeates them: All are secondary data designed to study other phenomena and social processes. Given this, it becomes challenging to adequately address important issues such as selection effects (see below).

Data limitations in this area also impact the most basic aspects of research: the dependent and independent variables. Data on incarceration are comparatively scarce and there is considerable variation in how incarceration is operationalized. Some studies operationalize incarceration as a short period in a jail, others as imprisonment of over a year, and others as lifetime prevalence of incarceration. Although each of these measures has potential strengths and weaknesses, it is necessary to move research toward greater conceptual clarity on the treatment variable and to consider how different operationalizations of incarceration might condition findings. Similar problems can often plague the outcome variables. Studies thus far commonly employ different operationalizations of health, making it difficult to compare results. Finally, perhaps most pressing is the need for longitudinal measures of health outcomes. We know inmates have more health problems than noninmates do, but moving toward causal claims places greater demands on the data, including repeated measures over time that allow scholars to employ a full range of analytical approaches.

Proper Comparison Groups
We know that inmates have increased medical problems compared with the general population (Binswanger et al. 2009), but absent more information it remains unclear whether differences are a function of incarceration or of characteristics that are related both to health and to the likelihood of incarceration. Thus, with whom we compare (ex-)inmates is of paramount importance. Much work, including some of ours, compares inmates with noninmates after adjusting for a number of covariates. Although data limitations often prevent more fine-grained comparative analysis, the problems of covariate adjustment for causal inferences are well known. Although within-person change models, often termed fixed-effects or individual trajectory models, offer the most stringent tests of the incarceration–health relationship, such analyses demand longitudinal data with repeated measures that are often lacking in this area of research. In cases in which data limitations prevent such analysis, a fruitful comparison group might be individuals convicted of a crime but not incarcerated. Compared with the general population, this group of convicted but nonincarcerated felons is more similar to the incarcerated population and thus might be a more appropriate comparison group. Regardless of the specific focus, as research in the area moves forward, increased attention to the appropriate comparison groups is required.

Selection Effects
One of the most pressing issues facing the research on incarceration and heath is potential bias from selection effects. As Johnson & Easterling argued (2012, p. 342),

Despite what appears to be converging evidence that parental incarceration poses a significant threat to child development, this area of inquiry has yet to overcome important methodological and conceptual challenges related to selection bias. It is therefore unclear whether the difficulties that have been observed among children whose parents are incarcerated are due to the incarceration itself or to other adversities that children have experienced.
Although others have offered a thoughtful and systematic response to such critiques (Wildeman et al. 2013), our point is a basic one: Given how closely the correlates of incarceration map over the determinants of poor heath, scholars must pay particular attention to potential bias from selection effects and employ rigorous analytical methods and careful research designs to address it. Absent such careful consideration, this area of research remains open to critiques of selection bias. For instance, inmates may have poorer health profiles because of a history of drug use rather than incarceration itself. Along similar lines, perhaps the appearance of an effect of parental incarceration on children's health is actually a product of parental absenteeism, or maybe the apparent effect of incarceration on individual health is a product of earnings inequality or of individual or family characteristics early in life that increase the chances both of incarceration and of poor health. Although some research in the area has begun to address these important critiques, future research meant to estimate the precise magnitude of the impact of incarceration on individual, family, and community health must recognize the potential bias of selection effects.

AN AGENDA FOR FUTURE RESEARCH ON THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN INCARCERATION AND HEALTH
Although research on incarceration and health has rapidly grown in recent years, many important substantive and methodological items remain to be addressed. Although our suggestions are not exhaustive, we propose several important considerations for the scientific record as researchers move forward in understanding this relationship. One area that appears ripe for additional inquiry is the treatment variable. The literature takes a fairly broad view of the term incarceration. Without giving preference to one over the other, some data sets appear to capture more invasive spells of imprisonment, whereas others might capture just a few days in jail (e.g., see collection protocol differences between the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997). According to recent data, the average sentence in state prisons is slightly over 4 years, with offenders serving roughly half of the sentence. In contrast, most spells in jail are less than 3 days, and many people who spend a few nights in jail are ultimately not convicted of any crime. Given these diverse treatments, future work should investigate whether these different types and lengths of correctional confinement produce divergent effects (Massoglia & Warner 2011).

A related line of inquiry might examine how different levels of confinement—for example, minimum versus maximum security—might be associated with differences in and severity of adverse health outcomes. In addition, work has not considered whether there is state or regional variation in the incarceration–health relationship. It may be, for instance, that states with more integrative postrelease policies have better health outcomes. Along similar lines, although the United States is the world leader in terms of incarceration, comparative sociologically oriented work on incarceration and health is relatively sparse (Pridemore 2014). The field would surely be advanced if scholars brought more comparative approaches to this area. For example, incarceration may still affect health even in nations with lower incarceration rates and shorter sentence lengths. Yet research could examine, for instance, whether cultural differences across nations likely influence the structure of prisons and the experience of incarceration, both of which could affect any impact of incarceration on health (and of course on other collateral consequences of incarceration).

Research should also move toward a focus on the causal mechanisms linking incarceration to poor health outcomes. Thus far, research has done a better job showing that incarceration matters rather than why incarceration matters. A great deal of research discusses stress and stigma. Both potential mechanisms have pragmatic appeal and research in both criminology and medical sociology suggests they are appropriate explanatory mechanisms. To date, however, precise specifications of the causal pathways linking these and related factors to health have been elusive. Such causal pathways to poor health outcomes are notoriously difficult to model, but as this research area matures, identifying causal mechanisms must progress.

Greater research on female (ex-)inmates would also advance the field. To date, much of the work in the area has excluded female offenders. This omission is notable for a number of reasons. First, although much smaller, the size of the female incarcerated population is growing far faster than the size of the male population. Second, female inmates have a different set of risk factors across a number of areas—drug use, relationship history, history of abuse—that are likely linked to health outcomes (see Lindquist & Lindquist 1997). Third, compared with men, women have a different set of health needs, suggesting that the incarceration experience may differentially impact women's health. The research of Massoglia et al. (2014) and Spaulding et al. (2011) provides evidence not only that the health consequences of incarceration are different for men and women but that the negative effects may be stronger for women, at least on some outcomes. Given the differences between male and female offenders, a sustained and focused inquiry into potential gender differences in the incarceration–health relationship seems particularly timely.

As research on the incarceration–health relationship moves forward, two other related substantive avenues for future research are important. At first view each avenue appears somewhat counterintuitive. This research area would be well served if future research considered the potential positive impact of incarceration on health at both the individual and community levels. Although research has clearly demonstrated a negative impact of incarceration on individual health across a variety of outcomes, other work has demonstrated differential effects of incarceration on family life (Wildeman & Turney 2014), and a consideration of the potentially positive impact of incarceration on health is warranted for a number of reasons.

At the individual level, on average persons who are incarcerated often are drawn disproportionately from a disadvantaged background. Given less access to health care and the generally poorer health status of those from these disadvantaged backgrounds, the correctional institution may provide inmates with opportunities to improve their health. The correctional setting provides some inmates better access to fundamental health needs such as nutrition and a place to sleep that is heated and dry. Aside from these most basic health requirements, which surely are not met for some of these individuals outside of prison, the institution removes some individuals from destructive social environments that may include high levels of drug use and, particularly for women, a history of physical abuse. Removing individuals from such environments might provide some health benefits. Finally, although often lacking in several respects, health care provisions in prisons may represent a dramatic improvement over the care (if any) some inmates receive outside prison. In short, due to the extremely disadvantaged background from which many inmates are drawn, there is a rationale for exploring the possibility of a positive, even if short-term or limited, impact of incarceration on the individual health of some inmates. Our review reveals evidence of such potential short- and long-term positive effects of incarceration on health (Mumola 2007; Patterson 2010; Rosen et al. 2011, 2008). This is a sensitive topic, and obviously the policy response is not to increase incarceration in hopes of better health outcomes. The results are intriguing, however, and if they hold up, they will serve as a stark indicator of the generally poor health care provided to this segment of the population. Further, they would suggest the importance of better education about and more careful planning for postrelease health care and for more rational policies for sharing medical data with parole officers, social workers, and others tasked with aiding prisoners upon release.

Similarly, the prison may produce other types of health benefits, in particular for treatable diseases. Again the potential benefits stem from the reality of the marginal or nonexistent health care inmates have on the outside, and at the aggregate level it is important to consider the remarkable expansion and size of the penal system. Correctional facilities offer an opportunity to impact the health profile of a large and underserved aspect of the community. Many state prison systems screen for and treat communicable diseases. For specific diseases or infections for which treatment can cure an illness or provide lasting improvement in health functioning, correctional facilities offer the potential to improve individual health and aggregate health inequities. For instance, because data indicate that a large number of individuals with treatable sexually transmitted infections are passing through correctional facilities, screening and treatment in prisons could not only improve individual health but also reduce the prevalence of infections in the general community. In short, given the high levels of inequality and health disparities characteristic of American society at both the individual and community levels, it could be fruitful to investigate how the penal system could produce some improvements in health outcomes.

A paramount item to address in future research is data collection and research design. To this point nearly all studies of the incarceration–health association employed secondary data. This approach presents important methodological and theoretical challenges. Methodologically, for example, many of these studies are vulnerable to selection bias. Theoretically, these data sets do not allow us to test several important hypotheses about the incarceration–health association because data collection was undertaken to answer other questions. Now that there is strong evidence that incarceration has consequences for individual, family, and community health, it is time to undertake large-scale projects that focus specifically on this association. These projects would involve original data collection aimed at and research designs capable of answering the most poignant theoretical questions now being posed in this research area. This type of original data collection would allow us to (a) address methodological limitations such as selection effects, (b) determine whether the health effects of incarceration are causal or spurious, and (c) undertake tests of theory capable of discovering the direct, indirect, and conditional causal pathways through which incarceration influences health.

Finally, our review is notable for what fell outside our specific scope of inquiry. For example, space limitations prevented us from systematically reviewing the rapidly expanding literature on the impact of incarceration on mental health outcomes.2 Similar to the literature on physical health, the literature on the mental health consequences of incarceration considers the impact on both inmates (Schnittker et al. 2012) and family members of those who are incarcerated (Turney et al. 2012, Wildeman et al. 2013). This important line of research is still emerging, and future research focused on clarifying the scope of incarceration's impact on mental health outcomes and the specific mechanisms that produce such effects would advance this research area. Similarly, we were able to only broadly consider how incarceration may disrupt family functioning in ways that are related to a host of developmental and health outcomes for both children and spouses of inmates (see Turney 2015, Turney & Wildeman 2015). Further inquiry into this area is important to determine the breadth and range of the collateral consequences of incarceration and to test the possible causal pathways linking incarceration and health.

CONCLUSION
In the last decade there has been a sustained research focus on the health consequences of incarceration. Sociologists across a range of subfields, including criminology, stratification, life course processes, family functioning, and medical sociology, have undertaken research on the topic. In this review we attempt to summarize this rapidly expanding literature while pointing to areas in which additional research is warranted. Despite the wealth of articles published in recent years, research in the area is still at its nascent stages, as is—from a historical context—our understanding of the penal system and its effects on society. As the number of individuals released from prison grows, and as they advance in age, research on the relationship between incarceration and health will continue to speak to a host of critical academic, social, and policy issues. To that end, we view the important work to date as a starting point for future research in the area.

        Given the text identify a series of relationships between variables that have a well defined positive direction and a clear textual backing.
        For example, if a text says "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate" would be good variables. Variables that are implied but not directly stated by the text such as "education infilstructure" should not be included. 
        The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 
        or 'inconclusive'. The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
        The SupportText field of your output should include a section of verbatim from the text in addition to any comments you want to make about your output, without paraphrasing.
        Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices.

        The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "isCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "isCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```
        


Input begins:

        Abstract
The expansion of the penal system has been one of the most dramatic trends in contemporary American society. A wealth of research has examined the impact of incarceration on a range of later life outcomes and has considered how the penal system has emerged as a mechanism of stratification and inequality in the United States. In this article, we review the literature from a comparatively new vein of this research: the impact of incarceration on health outcomes. We first consider the impact of incarceration on a range of individual outcomes, from chronic health conditions to mortality. We then consider outcomes beyond the individual, including the health of family members and community health outcomes. Next, we discuss mechanisms linking incarceration and health outcomes before closing with a consideration of limitations in the field and directions for future research.

Keywords
incarceration, health, mortality, inequality, stress

INTRODUCTION
This article reviews the sociological literature on the effects of incarceration on health, focusing specifically on physical morbidity and mortality. During the last four decades the American penal system grew at an unprecedented rate. The incarceration rate, which was roughly stable for 50 years prior to 1975, increased approximately fivefold since 1975 (Pettit & Western 2004). More than six million US residents are now or have been incarcerated and there are over 17 million felons or ex-felons in the United States. These numbers demonstrate the massive size of the penal system, and the current felon population is approximately six times larger than it was in 1970 (Uggen et al. 2006). Although the expansion of the penal system has affected all demographic groups, the impact was most acute for disadvantaged minorities and minority communities, for which rates of incarceration are five to eight times higher than rates for similarly situated whites (Pettit & Western 2004).

The penal system grew so large and so rapidly it now draws comparisons to the American system of higher education. Each year approximately as many men graduate college as are released from prison (Knapp et al. 2008), and the size of the incarcerated population (Glaze & Parks 2012) is approximately the same as the enrollment at all American research universities (Snyder & Dillow 2010). Given this rapid expansion and the wide swath the penal system cuts through American society, some argue incarceration is now a phase in the life course for some population subgroups (Pettit & Western 2004) and that correctional policies have created a new felon class in American society (Uggen et al. 2006).

This remarkable growth produced a groundswell of research highlighting the far-reaching consequences of incarceration. For example, research illustrates the consequences of incarceration for family functioning, including the mental health of inmates' partners, the behavior of their children, and the impact of incarceration on marital dissolution (Comfort 2007, Goffman 2009, Lopoo & Western 2005, Massoglia et al. 2011, Turney et al. 2012, Western & Wildeman 2009). A related line of research reveals the stratifying impact of incarceration on economic indicators such as childhood poverty and on wages and entrance into the labor market (Pager 2003, Pager et al. 2009, Western 2002, Wildeman 2009). Scholars are becoming increasingly aware of the stratifying impact of incarceration and penal sanctions on a range of social and economic inequalities (Harris et al. 2010, Wakefield & Uggen 2010). Given that the expansion of the penal system has disproportionately impacted minorities (Pettit & Western 2004), it is important to consider whether and to what extent minorities and minority communities disproportionately feel the indirect consequences of the expansion. At least two distinct processes may drive any disproportionate impact of the penal system (Massoglia 2008b). First, as a percentage of the population many more minorities are exposed to the penal system, so even if the effect is the same across different races the aggregate impact will be larger for minority groups. Second, for a variety of reasons the detrimental consequences of incarceration could be felt more strongly by minorities. Thus, the current state of the field shows incarceration has emerged as a mechanism of stratification in American society and contributes to racial inequality.

Against this backdrop, the impact of incarceration on health outcomes and inequalities has received considerable attention, and in this article we review this body of research. We begin by discussing the general association between incarceration and individual health functioning. From there, we expand our scope and consider the impact of incarceration on family and neighborhood indicators of health. Next, we discuss the literature on the association between incarceration and mortality. Following that, we consider whether incarceration may have health benefits for some demographic groups. We then discuss the key potential sociological explanations for the relationship between incarceration and health. We conclude by discussing some of the limitations of the research on incarceration and health and then outline an agenda for future research in the incarceration–health tradition.

INCARCERATION AND MORBIDITY
Individual Health
A number of studies have examined the relationship between incarceration and a range of individual-level health outcomes. Some of the most innovative research in this area leveraged longitudinal data to examine within-person change in health status after a period of incarceration. Schnittker & John (2007), for example, focused on within-person change using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79). Three findings from this important paper set the stage for later sociological work in the area. First, the authors found that individuals with a history of incarceration report more chronic health problems after their period of incarceration than before. Second, the authors accounted for chronic health problems prior to prison, which allowed them to demonstrate empirically that incarceration is associated with a negative change in health status. Third, Schnittker & John found that the impact of the length of incarceration on health appears to be less important than the fact of incarceration itself.

Other works utilizing the same data set (NLSY) reached similar conclusions. For example, Massoglia (2008a) found that incarceration is correlated with lower self-reported health and that having been incarcerated was more consequential than the length of incarceration. Similarly, using the same data set, Massoglia (2008b) found that relative to those who had not been incarcerated, those who had been incarcerated disproportionately suffer from infectious diseases (e.g., hepatitis, tuberculosis) and stress-related illness.

Other studies looked at different aspects of health and considered the potential impact of incarceration. For example, obesity is a socially patterned epidemic with higher prevalence among those of lower socioeconomic status and among ethnic/racial minorities. For instance, Houle (2014) investigated how incarceration might contribute to patterns of obesity. The author examined trajectories of body mass index (BMI) and found that being incarcerated increases BMI. The effects varied, however, with strongest effects for blacks and for individuals with less education. In the conclusion the author echoed a common theme across many studies in the area: Given the disproportionate rates of incarceration, and the stronger effects for blacks, the penal system may condition the structure of obesity disparities across the life course (Houle 2014).1

FAMILY, NEIGHBORHOOD, AND POPULATION HEALTH
An emerging literature examines the detrimental impact of incarceration on family, neighborhood, and population health. The impact of incarceration on health, including mental health (Wildeman et al. 2012), extends to family members (including partners and children) of those who are incarcerated (Wakefield & Wildeman 2013, Wildeman & Muller 2012). Roettger & Boardman (2012) used the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health to investigate the impact of parental incarceration on childhood body mass. Using multiple analytic approaches and accounting for several potentially confounding factors such as stressful life events and individual and family characteristics, the authors found that parental incarceration is associated with increased body mass among female, but not male, children of those who were incarcerated.

Lee et al. (2014) also found that results vary by gender. Having a family member incarcerated increased the likelihood of women to experience a heart attack, stroke, or obesity or to have fair to poor health. There was no relationship found among males who had a family member incarcerated. This study revealed that the incarceration of a family member has implications for women's cardiovascular health and, consistent with other literature in the area, that incarceration contributes to overall racial disparities in health. Given the current data limitations of studying incarceration and health, this study is also notable because it utilized the National Survey of American Life, a cross-sectional, nationally representative study.

The Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study is one of the most widely used data sets to study the effects of incarceration on families (see Wildeman & Western 2010). What becomes clear from fragile families, and is relevant for understanding the health problems associated with incarceration, is that the families most likely to be affected by incarceration are often disadvantaged socially, residentially, and economically. That is, the families most likely to experience incarceration are already at risk for problematic outcomes, including poor health.

In contrast to other research that focuses on the direct effects of incarceration on health outcomes, many of the harmful effects of incarceration on children's health operate indirectly through other mechanisms, including family processes (Arditti et al. 2003, Waller & Swisher 2006), relationships among partners (Comfort 2008), changes in economic well-being (Geller et al. 2011, Schwartz-Soicher et al. 2011), or educational performance (Cho 2009a,b). In short, paternal incarceration affects child health through its detrimental impact on family and attainment processes important to children's health, such as educational, labor market, and residential attainment.

In a comprehensive treatment of the topic, Wakefield & Wildeman (2013) concluded incarceration has wide-ranging effects on childhood health and well-being, including increasing mental health and behavioral problems. Because the risk of paternal incarceration is much higher for black children than for white children, Wakefield & Wildeman (2011, 2013) concluded that parental incarceration is an important contributor to racial disparities in childhood health and well-being.

Parental incarceration also leads to poor health outcomes by increasing the likelihood that children will adopt behaviors associated with poor health. For instance, parental incarceration is associated with behavioral problems in children (Geller et al. 2011; Murray et al. 2012a,b), including physical aggression (Wildeman 2010) and criminality (Roettger & Swisher 2011). Parental incarceration also leads to increased drug and alcohol use among children, which has obvious implications for the health of children (Roettger et al. 2011). Research also suggests maternal incarceration may have stronger negative effects on children than paternal incarceration does (Murray & Farrington 2008).

Turney (2014) provides an insightful and timely bridge between family health outcomes and larger community and population health outcomes. Even after accounting for an array of relevant factors, Turney found an independent impact of incarceration on outcomes ranging from behavior and conduct problems to developmental delays. She concluded that children's health disadvantages are an overlooked consequence of incarceration, arguing that proliferation of stress across generations is a mechanism by which parental incarceration influences the health of children. Perhaps more importantly, Turney suggested that given its unequal distribution across different demographic groups in the population, incarceration may have implications for population-level class and ethnic inequalities in children's health.

Turney's findings are consistent with research that documents many detrimental effects of incarceration on community and public health (see discussion in Massoglia & Schnittker 2009). One such study used state-level panel data stretching almost 25 years and found an association between incarceration and poorer population health. This association is strongest for infant mortality and female life expectancy (Wildeman 2012). Another study examined the relationship between incarceration and infection rates of immunodeficiency syndromes (Johnson & Raphael 2009). The authors found that incarceration had a significant effect on AIDS infection rates for both males and females and concluded that a large proportion of the racial disparities in AIDS infections among black women can be explained by higher incarceration rates among black men (Johnson & Raphael 2009). One compelling aspect of this study is its use of data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and case-level US data spanning the period 1982–1996, making it both longitudinal and representative.

INCARCERATION AND MORTALITY
Mortality During Incarceration
Studies examining mortality within the prison and comparing within-prison mortality with that of the general population are rare. Mumola (2007) used national-level data to summarize within-prison mortality and compare it with the rates for the US resident population. Although his comparisons between the two populations were not adjusted for differences in age and sex, the results are telling. There were approximately 3,000 deaths per year in US prisons between 2001 and 2004, corresponding to an average annual mortality rate of 250 per 100,000 prisoners. Eighty-nine percent of prison deaths were due to internal causes, with suicide (6% of all deaths) the only external cause in the 10 leading causes of death among prisoners. Other external causes such as homicide, alcohol/drug overdose, and accidental injury comprised 2%, 1%, and 1% of deaths, respectively. The leading causes of death were heart disease (annual rate of 68 per 100,000 prisoners) and cancer (58 per 100,000), followed by liver diseases (25 per 100,000), AIDS (18 per 100,000), and suicide (15 per 100,000). Approximately two-thirds of all deaths, including over 90% of all AIDS-related deaths, resulted from conditions that existed when the inmate entered prison. There was substantial state-level variation in the mortality rate due to internal causes among those incarcerated: the rate in Louisiana, Tennessee, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and Kentucky was approximately three times higher than the rate in Utah, North Dakota, Iowa, Alaska, and Vermont.

In a study of mortality among Texas male inmates between 1992 and 2003, Harzke et al. (2011) found the leading causes of death to be infections, cancer, and cardiovascular disease. Sixty-nine percent of deaths due to infection were caused by AIDS, though as shown in other analyses the inmate death rate due to infection declined substantially over time. Nevertheless, after adjusting for age and race, the authors found that annual mortality rates due to infection were still two to three times higher in the incarcerated population than in the general population of Texas. Inmate deaths due to cardiovascular diseases also dropped sharply over this period, as did deaths due to cancer and liver disease, leading the authors to conclude that changes in health care in the Texas prison system over time—including improvements in screening protocols, in infirmary and outpatient capacity, and in specialty care—may have been responsible for the declines.

Using data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics and the Census Bureau for the period 1985–1998, Patterson (2010) compared sex- and ethnic-specific mortality rates for prisoners and nonprisoners aged 18–65. Although most studies focus on men, Patterson found incarceration to have stronger effects on female mortality than on male mortality. Her results also showed white male prisoners experienced significantly higher death rates than white male nonprisoners did. Using data on men aged 20–79 in North Carolina for the period 1995–2005, Rosen et al. (2011) compared mortality rates of prisoners with those of nonprisoners. The all-cause standardized mortality ratio (SMR) for white inmates was 1.12, with more deaths than expected from HIV and viral hepatitis infections, liver disease, cancer, and respiratory disease. In a retrospective cohort study, Spaulding et al. (2011) examined all persons in Georgia prisons on June 30, 1991, to determine their survivability through the end of 2006. As with prior studies, the authors found white men were at a substantially higher risk for mortality (SMR=1.28) while incarcerated than when not incarcerated. The results of these studies suggest white men are at an increased risk of mortality when living in prison than when not living in prison, and that this risk is driven largely by deaths due to infectious diseases, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. The findings, however, are different for black men.

Does Incarceration Reduce Mortality Among Black Men?
In spite of the growing body of research demonstrating the negative health implications of incarceration, there is increasing evidence that incarceration has a protective effect on mortality rates for black men. Using national-level data, Mumola (2007) found that the mortality rate for black male prisoners aged 15–64 was 19% lower than that for black men in the general population. This was driven, however, by differences in ethnic-specific mortality rates. Incarcerated whites and Hispanics had mortality rates slightly above those for the corresponding groups in the general population, whereas the mortality rate for incarcerated blacks was 57% lower than the rate for blacks in the general population. Patterson's (2010) results also revealed that the substantial inequality in mortality rates for blacks and whites in the general population largely disappeared in the incarcerated population. She found that whereas the within-prison mortality rate for white males was higher than the rate for white males in the general population, the within-prison mortality rate for black males was considerably lower than the rate for black males in the general population. Similarly, using standardized mortality ratios to compare death rates of males in North Carolina prisons with expected death rates based on state residents, Rosen et al. (2011) found 48% fewer deaths than expected among black prisoners.

Why might incarceration protect black males against mortality? First, the controlled prison environment can protect against external causes of death, such as violence and transport accidents, that are high among young black males in the general population (Patterson 2010, Rosen et al. 2011), especially because those incarcerated are probably among the most at risk of death from these causes. Second, low-income black males of all ages may benefit from the availability of healthcare in prison, which would be largely either inaccessible or unused outside prison. Patterson (2010), for example, found that the differential mortality rate between incarcerated and nonincarcerated young black men was not entirely accounted for when firearm and motor vehicle deaths were removed from the general population comparison group. Further, Rosen et al. (2011) found that not only traumatic but also chronic causes of deaths such as cardiovascular disease and cancer were lower than expected among incarcerated black males. Chronic causes of death are more common to an older population. Thus, the food, shelter, and especially medical care provided in prison may protect black males against mortality. The hypothesis of better health care for blacks inside prison relative to outside prison received further evidence from another study by Rosen et al. (2008), who found fewer than expected all-cause deaths and deaths from chronic disorders among black former inmates. The authors of these studies concluded that different aspects of the prison environment, both environmental controls and provision of services, equalize the ethnic mortality disparities outside prison.

Another study, however, suggests an alternative explanation. The practice of compassionate release, i.e., releasing inmates who are in particularly poor health and close to death, is not uncommon in some states. Compassionate release reduces the mortality rate of the incarcerated population and increases the mortality rate of the comparable resident population. In their study of mortality among current and former Georgia prisoners, Spaulding et al. (2011) initially found a substantially lower mortality rate among incarcerated black men relative to nonincarcerated black men. After controlling for the compassionate release of moribund prisoners, however, the effect disappeared. Thus, although environmental controls of the prison may protect against external causes of death for young black men, findings indicating that health care is better for incarcerated black men may stem from an artifact of end-of-life prison policies, and more research is required before definitive conclusions can be drawn.

MORTALITY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING RELEASE FROM PRISON
The majority of studies of incarceration and postrelease mortality examined short-term effects. Analyses conducted in several nations consistently revealed the period immediately following release from prison to be extremely dangerous for ex-inmates (Bird & Hutchinson 2003; Farrell & Marsden 2008; Graham 2003; Kariminia et al. 2007a,b; Pratt et al. 2006; Seaman et al. 1998). Binswanger et al. (2007) undertook a retrospective cohort study of all inmates released from the Washington State Department of Corrections between 1999 and 2003, and compared their mortality rates with those in the state population. Adjusting for age, sex, and ethnicity, the mortality rate for recently released inmates during the entire follow-up period was 777 per 100,000 person-years, which was 3.5 times higher than the rate for the general population. In the first two weeks following release, the death rate was nearly 2,600 per 100,000 person-years, or approximately 13 times higher than the rate for the general population. The authors' finding of a considerable mortality risk in the first two weeks following release from custody is consistent with results from other studies of both prisons (Bird & Hutchinson 2003, Kariminia et al. 2007b, Krinsky et al. 2009, Seaman et al. 1998, Verger et al. 2003) and jails (Lim et al. 2012).

By a wide margin, the leading cause of death for ex-inmates during the immediate postrelease period is drug overdose. Additional leading causes of death during this time include external causes such as homicide and suicide. During this period deaths due to drug overdose are likely the result of several factors related to (a) the behavior of the individual, including polydrug use (especially involving opioids) and decreased physiological tolerance during a period of little or no use while incarcerated, and (b) the interaction between the individual and the criminal justice system, including the failure to properly identify those most at risk, improper or absent prerelease planning and counseling, and little or no provision of health care or follow-up after release (Møller et al. 2010). Further studies are required to determine which characteristics put ex-inmates most at risk of death, not only from drug overdose (Binswanger et al. 2011, Møller et al. 2010) but also from other preventable causes such as homicide and suicide (Pratt et al. 2006), during this period.

LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF INCARCERATION ON MORTALITY
Although fewer studies examined the long-term impact of incarceration on mortality, this is an important exercise because it allows scholars to determine whether any effects of incarceration on morbidity translate to early mortality, whether incarceration increases the risk of premature mortality from internal and chronic causes of death relative to the external and acute causes of death, and whether ex-inmates are at a higher risk of death immediately following release. The results from studies showing the long-term effects of incarceration on mortality are less consistent than those showing short-term effects.

Some studies found an association between incarceration and mortality. In an analysis that linked prison and state death records in North Carolina over a 25-year period, Rosen et al. (2008) used SMRs to compare the mortality of male ex-inmates aged 20–69 with that of other state residents. Although all-cause mortality was higher among ex-prisoners than among other state residents, there were large differences by ethnicity. The all-cause SMRs were 2.08 for whites and 1.03 for blacks (though the latter effect was small, it was statistically significant). The authors found that former inmates had higher-than-expected mortality from homicides, accidents, substance use, HIV, liver disease, and liver cancer. Spaulding et al. (2011) linked prison and death records and estimated SMRs to examine mortality among the cohort of all persons incarcerated in Georgia state prisons on June 30, 1991, through 2006. They found positive and significant SMRs for all ex-inmates and for sex- and ethnic-specific ex-inmate groups. Again, however, SMRs were larger for whites (2.12) than for blacks (1.32). The authors included women in their study and found that SMRs were larger for women (2.56) than for men (1.51). The authors' results revealed that HIV, cancer, cirrhosis, homicide, transport accidents, and overdoses accounted for nearly two-thirds of the excess mortality among former prisoners.

Utilizing data from a large-scale population-based case-control study of Russian men aged 25–54 and controlling for the known causes of premature mortality among this group, Pridemore (2014) estimated mortality odds ratios to examine the association between incarceration and premature mortality. He found that, relative to men who had not been incarcerated, men who had been incarcerated were more than twice as likely to die prematurely. Comparing the age-adjusted odds of specific causes of death of decedent men who had been incarcerated with those of decedent men who had not been incarcerated, the author found the former were more likely to die from infectious diseases (OR=3.10), drug overdose (OR=2.32), homicide (OR=1.99), and respiratory disease (OR=1.79). Patterson (2013) used data from New York state to study the impact of incarceration length on postprison mortality. Her results showed that each additional year in prison produced a nearly 16% increase in the odds of death and a two-year decline in life expectancy. Thus, for someone 30 years old five years in prison would increase the odds of death by approximately 80% and result in a loss in life expectancy of approximately 10 years. As with other studies she found the risk of mortality was highest immediately following release from prison, with the time to recovery equal to approximately two-thirds of the time served in prison. Patterson concluded that incarceration length has a direct impact on life expectancy.

Other evidence suggests incarceration has no long-term effect on mortality. First, although the studies described above have longer-term follow-up periods, they include deaths from the time immediately following release from prison. These deaths may be driving any association found between incarceration and premature mortality, especially because we know many of the excess deaths in these studies of long-term effects resulted from the same causes of death common in studies of mortality during the immediate postrelease period, including drug overdose, homicide, and suicide. Similarly, although Patterson (2013) found that the length of incarceration has dramatic effects on the odds of death and on life expectancy, she also found (a) that return to baseline odds of death occurred after approximately two-thirds of the individual's incarceration length and (b) that 70% of the individuals in her sample were incarcerated less than two years and 86% less than three years.

Second, some studies reveal no association between incarceration and premature mortality. For example, Kjelsberg & Laake (2010) examined all-cause and cause-specific mortality among Norwegian male and female convicted offenders, some of whom had experienced incarceration and some of whom had not. Whereas the unadjusted odds ratio for incarceration was significantly associated with all-cause mortality for men, it was nonsignificant when adjusted for the other variables in the model. Further, they found no association between incarceration and all-cause mortality for women, nor were there effects of incarceration on deaths from substance abuse, accidents, homicides, or suicides. In a study of incarceration and premature mortality using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79), Massoglia et al. (2014) found differential effects by gender. In their sample, women who had been incarcerated were approximately 2.5 times more likely to die prematurely than women who had not been incarcerated. However, incarceration had no effect on premature mortality for men. This stronger effect for women is consistent with the findings from Spaulding et al. (2011).

Finally, Dirkzwager et al. (2012) studied the effects of first-time incarceration on postprison mortality over a 25-year period among a representative group of over 2,000 Dutch offenders who were convicted in 1977. Their findings were equivocal. Results showed that those who had been incarcerated were significantly more likely to die during the follow-up period when compared with the general population (OR=3.21) and with a group of convicted offenders who had not been incarcerated (OR=1.47). After applying propensity score analysis, however, the matched formerly incarcerated group was not at a significantly greater risk of death than the matched control group (OR=1.40; 95% confidence interval: 0.95–2.07). Thus, only a handful of studies have examined incarceration and premature mortality with a long-term follow-up, and the inconsistent findings suggest further research is required before strong conclusions can be drawn.

PATHWAYS LINKING INCARCERATION TO NEGATIVE EFFECTS ON HEALTH
Space limitations preclude us from discussing all possible pathways that explain why incarceration may have negative effects on health. Therefore, we focus our discussion on the potential explanations that have received the most attention in the sociological literature.

Exposure to Infectious Diseases
Although many inmates with an infectious disease entered correctional facilities with the infection, the prison places inmates at a disproportionate risk of acquiring infectious diseases such as tuberculosis, hepatitis, HIV, sexually transmitted infections, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (Maruschak 2008). Approximately 25% of US inmates have latent tuberculosis infection, which is 6 to 10 times higher compared with the general population (Bick 2007). Approximately 17% of inmates have hepatitis C compared with approximately 2% of the general population, with the prison population housing nearly 30% of all hepatitis C cases in the United States (Varan et al. 2014). Compared with approximately 0.3% of the general population, approximately 1.5% of inmates are HIV positive (Maruschak 2012). As in the general population, cases of hepatitis C and HIV in the incarcerated population declined considerably between 2000 and 2010. The disproportionate exposure to infectious diseases for inmates occurs in the context of a prison environment with efficient conditions for disease transmission: overcrowding; poor ventilation; poor nutrition; shared hygiene facilities; shared personal hygiene items such as soap and razors; poor health care; delayed diagnosis; lack of expertise in infection control; prohibitions against effective harm reduction techniques such as use of condoms; and practices such as amateur tattooing and piercing, unprotected sex, and use of unsterilized drug injection equipment. Contracting a disease while in prison increases the chances of ill health upon release and, in the case of tuberculosis, hepatitis C, and HIV, increases the risk of premature mortality.

Incarceration as an Acute and Chronic Stressor
Incarceration is an acute stressor. Imprisonment is a major life event that requires dramatic changes in a short period across a number of life circumstances (Massoglia 2008a). Research shows such events cause considerable stress, which can have negative repercussions for health (Thoits 1995, Wheaton 1994). Incarceration is also a chronic stressor (Pearlin 1989). Imprisonment can last for years, adding chronic stress to the initial acute shock. Daily stressors in prison can include lack of privacy, overcrowded conditions, antagonistic relationships with guards and inmates, witnessing violence, and the threat of violent victimization. Upon release from prison, former inmates must deal with enduring stressors such as social stigma and the disruption of social bonds such as employment and relationships with family and friends.

Research consistently shows that stress is negatively associated with health. Exposure to repeated or chronic stressors increases allostatic load, which can lead to negative health outcomes (McEwen & Stellar 1993). The psychoneuroimmunology literature, for example, reveals that chronic stress is associated with immune dysfunction (Glaser & Kiecolt-Glaser 2005), and research shows that chronic exposure to hostile conditions—a staple of prison life—is associated with immune dysfunction that can last for long periods. According to Pridemore (2014, p. 217), this “stress-induced immune dysfunction perversely increases the inmate's vulnerability at precisely the time when exposure to infectious diseases is greatest, during imprisonment.” Beyond the confines of the prison, Schnittker & John (2007) found evidence suggesting the enduring social stigma of imprisonment mediates the association between incarceration and health, and Massoglia (2008a) found that former prisoners had increased risks of (a) being medically diagnosed with stress-related illnesses such as psychological problems, hypertension, and heart disease, and (b) self-reporting stress-related conditions such as chest pain and depression.

Incarceration as an Impediment to Social Integration
Incarceration is extremely disruptive to social integration and prosocial bonds. First, imprisonment makes it difficult to maintain stable family and friendship networks. The stigma attached to those who have been incarcerated makes them less desirable partners (Wilson 1987) and they have lower marriage rates following imprisonment (Huebner 2005). Individuals married at the time of incarceration have a greater risk of divorce both during and after imprisonment (Apel et al. 2010, Massoglia et al. 2011). Siennick et al. (2014) found that such marriages are at increased risk of poor marital quality, relationship violence, and extramarital sex and that these factors explain approximately 40% of the association between incarceration and divorce. Second, in many instances daily prison life requires social and psychological adaptations that make it difficult to reintegrate into the community and to develop and maintain healthy friendships following release (Braman 2004).

Third, the effects of incarceration on employment and earnings are varied but substantial. Experimental evidence shows that employers are biased against hiring former inmates (Pager 2003), and in their sample of Dutch offenders Ramakers et al. (2014) found a dose-response relationship between length of incarceration and poor employment prospects. Ex-inmates have limited access to career-oriented occupations and thus are often relegated to undesirable jobs with low wages, poor benefits, and no health insurance. Incarceration is associated with lower earnings growth over one's employment career (Sampson & Laub 1993) and with a wage penalty of 10–30% (Western et al. 2001). Western (2002) found the impact of incarceration on wage mobility so strong and the prevalence of imprisonment among black men so high, he concluded that incarceration is partially responsible for aggregate-level ethnic wage inequality in the United States. In short, incarceration is a major turning point in the life course and is remarkably disruptive for social integration (Sampson & Laub 2003).

Social integration and prosocial bonds, including education, marriage, social support, employment, and income, provide protective effects against morbidity and mortality. Marriage has long been associated with better health and increased longevity, especially for men (Verbrugge 1979). Using the same data from a case-control study of Russian men that showed an association between incarceration and premature mortality (Pridemore 2014), Pridemore et al. (2010) found that marriage and education were inversely associated with the risk of premature mortality. Declines in perceived health and physical functioning are slowed by full-time employment (Ross & Mirowsky 1995) and income is inversely associated with both morbidity and mortality (Backlund et al. 1996, Ecob & Davey Smith 1999). Given these findings, Pridemore (2014) argued that social integration and prosocial bonds likely play key mediating roles in the relationship between incarceration and premature mortality.

LIMITATIONS OF RESEARCH ON INCARCERATION AND HEALTH
Data
There are several limitations to prior research on incarceration and health. One of the most pressing issues in this area is data scarcity. A few data sets, for instance, the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and 1997, and the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, have been the source of data for a great deal of research in the area. Each data set has different strengths and weaknesses and scholars have been successful in moving the field forward using each, but a common thread permeates them: All are secondary data designed to study other phenomena and social processes. Given this, it becomes challenging to adequately address important issues such as selection effects (see below).

Data limitations in this area also impact the most basic aspects of research: the dependent and independent variables. Data on incarceration are comparatively scarce and there is considerable variation in how incarceration is operationalized. Some studies operationalize incarceration as a short period in a jail, others as imprisonment of over a year, and others as lifetime prevalence of incarceration. Although each of these measures has potential strengths and weaknesses, it is necessary to move research toward greater conceptual clarity on the treatment variable and to consider how different operationalizations of incarceration might condition findings. Similar problems can often plague the outcome variables. Studies thus far commonly employ different operationalizations of health, making it difficult to compare results. Finally, perhaps most pressing is the need for longitudinal measures of health outcomes. We know inmates have more health problems than noninmates do, but moving toward causal claims places greater demands on the data, including repeated measures over time that allow scholars to employ a full range of analytical approaches.

Proper Comparison Groups
We know that inmates have increased medical problems compared with the general population (Binswanger et al. 2009), but absent more information it remains unclear whether differences are a function of incarceration or of characteristics that are related both to health and to the likelihood of incarceration. Thus, with whom we compare (ex-)inmates is of paramount importance. Much work, including some of ours, compares inmates with noninmates after adjusting for a number of covariates. Although data limitations often prevent more fine-grained comparative analysis, the problems of covariate adjustment for causal inferences are well known. Although within-person change models, often termed fixed-effects or individual trajectory models, offer the most stringent tests of the incarceration–health relationship, such analyses demand longitudinal data with repeated measures that are often lacking in this area of research. In cases in which data limitations prevent such analysis, a fruitful comparison group might be individuals convicted of a crime but not incarcerated. Compared with the general population, this group of convicted but nonincarcerated felons is more similar to the incarcerated population and thus might be a more appropriate comparison group. Regardless of the specific focus, as research in the area moves forward, increased attention to the appropriate comparison groups is required.

Selection Effects
One of the most pressing issues facing the research on incarceration and heath is potential bias from selection effects. As Johnson & Easterling argued (2012, p. 342),

Despite what appears to be converging evidence that parental incarceration poses a significant threat to child development, this area of inquiry has yet to overcome important methodological and conceptual challenges related to selection bias. It is therefore unclear whether the difficulties that have been observed among children whose parents are incarcerated are due to the incarceration itself or to other adversities that children have experienced.
Although others have offered a thoughtful and systematic response to such critiques (Wildeman et al. 2013), our point is a basic one: Given how closely the correlates of incarceration map over the determinants of poor heath, scholars must pay particular attention to potential bias from selection effects and employ rigorous analytical methods and careful research designs to address it. Absent such careful consideration, this area of research remains open to critiques of selection bias. For instance, inmates may have poorer health profiles because of a history of drug use rather than incarceration itself. Along similar lines, perhaps the appearance of an effect of parental incarceration on children's health is actually a product of parental absenteeism, or maybe the apparent effect of incarceration on individual health is a product of earnings inequality or of individual or family characteristics early in life that increase the chances both of incarceration and of poor health. Although some research in the area has begun to address these important critiques, future research meant to estimate the precise magnitude of the impact of incarceration on individual, family, and community health must recognize the potential bias of selection effects.

AN AGENDA FOR FUTURE RESEARCH ON THE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN INCARCERATION AND HEALTH
Although research on incarceration and health has rapidly grown in recent years, many important substantive and methodological items remain to be addressed. Although our suggestions are not exhaustive, we propose several important considerations for the scientific record as researchers move forward in understanding this relationship. One area that appears ripe for additional inquiry is the treatment variable. The literature takes a fairly broad view of the term incarceration. Without giving preference to one over the other, some data sets appear to capture more invasive spells of imprisonment, whereas others might capture just a few days in jail (e.g., see collection protocol differences between the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997). According to recent data, the average sentence in state prisons is slightly over 4 years, with offenders serving roughly half of the sentence. In contrast, most spells in jail are less than 3 days, and many people who spend a few nights in jail are ultimately not convicted of any crime. Given these diverse treatments, future work should investigate whether these different types and lengths of correctional confinement produce divergent effects (Massoglia & Warner 2011).

A related line of inquiry might examine how different levels of confinement—for example, minimum versus maximum security—might be associated with differences in and severity of adverse health outcomes. In addition, work has not considered whether there is state or regional variation in the incarceration–health relationship. It may be, for instance, that states with more integrative postrelease policies have better health outcomes. Along similar lines, although the United States is the world leader in terms of incarceration, comparative sociologically oriented work on incarceration and health is relatively sparse (Pridemore 2014). The field would surely be advanced if scholars brought more comparative approaches to this area. For example, incarceration may still affect health even in nations with lower incarceration rates and shorter sentence lengths. Yet research could examine, for instance, whether cultural differences across nations likely influence the structure of prisons and the experience of incarceration, both of which could affect any impact of incarceration on health (and of course on other collateral consequences of incarceration).

Research should also move toward a focus on the causal mechanisms linking incarceration to poor health outcomes. Thus far, research has done a better job showing that incarceration matters rather than why incarceration matters. A great deal of research discusses stress and stigma. Both potential mechanisms have pragmatic appeal and research in both criminology and medical sociology suggests they are appropriate explanatory mechanisms. To date, however, precise specifications of the causal pathways linking these and related factors to health have been elusive. Such causal pathways to poor health outcomes are notoriously difficult to model, but as this research area matures, identifying causal mechanisms must progress.

Greater research on female (ex-)inmates would also advance the field. To date, much of the work in the area has excluded female offenders. This omission is notable for a number of reasons. First, although much smaller, the size of the female incarcerated population is growing far faster than the size of the male population. Second, female inmates have a different set of risk factors across a number of areas—drug use, relationship history, history of abuse—that are likely linked to health outcomes (see Lindquist & Lindquist 1997). Third, compared with men, women have a different set of health needs, suggesting that the incarceration experience may differentially impact women's health. The research of Massoglia et al. (2014) and Spaulding et al. (2011) provides evidence not only that the health consequences of incarceration are different for men and women but that the negative effects may be stronger for women, at least on some outcomes. Given the differences between male and female offenders, a sustained and focused inquiry into potential gender differences in the incarceration–health relationship seems particularly timely.

As research on the incarceration–health relationship moves forward, two other related substantive avenues for future research are important. At first view each avenue appears somewhat counterintuitive. This research area would be well served if future research considered the potential positive impact of incarceration on health at both the individual and community levels. Although research has clearly demonstrated a negative impact of incarceration on individual health across a variety of outcomes, other work has demonstrated differential effects of incarceration on family life (Wildeman & Turney 2014), and a consideration of the potentially positive impact of incarceration on health is warranted for a number of reasons.

At the individual level, on average persons who are incarcerated often are drawn disproportionately from a disadvantaged background. Given less access to health care and the generally poorer health status of those from these disadvantaged backgrounds, the correctional institution may provide inmates with opportunities to improve their health. The correctional setting provides some inmates better access to fundamental health needs such as nutrition and a place to sleep that is heated and dry. Aside from these most basic health requirements, which surely are not met for some of these individuals outside of prison, the institution removes some individuals from destructive social environments that may include high levels of drug use and, particularly for women, a history of physical abuse. Removing individuals from such environments might provide some health benefits. Finally, although often lacking in several respects, health care provisions in prisons may represent a dramatic improvement over the care (if any) some inmates receive outside prison. In short, due to the extremely disadvantaged background from which many inmates are drawn, there is a rationale for exploring the possibility of a positive, even if short-term or limited, impact of incarceration on the individual health of some inmates. Our review reveals evidence of such potential short- and long-term positive effects of incarceration on health (Mumola 2007; Patterson 2010; Rosen et al. 2011, 2008). This is a sensitive topic, and obviously the policy response is not to increase incarceration in hopes of better health outcomes. The results are intriguing, however, and if they hold up, they will serve as a stark indicator of the generally poor health care provided to this segment of the population. Further, they would suggest the importance of better education about and more careful planning for postrelease health care and for more rational policies for sharing medical data with parole officers, social workers, and others tasked with aiding prisoners upon release.

Similarly, the prison may produce other types of health benefits, in particular for treatable diseases. Again the potential benefits stem from the reality of the marginal or nonexistent health care inmates have on the outside, and at the aggregate level it is important to consider the remarkable expansion and size of the penal system. Correctional facilities offer an opportunity to impact the health profile of a large and underserved aspect of the community. Many state prison systems screen for and treat communicable diseases. For specific diseases or infections for which treatment can cure an illness or provide lasting improvement in health functioning, correctional facilities offer the potential to improve individual health and aggregate health inequities. For instance, because data indicate that a large number of individuals with treatable sexually transmitted infections are passing through correctional facilities, screening and treatment in prisons could not only improve individual health but also reduce the prevalence of infections in the general community. In short, given the high levels of inequality and health disparities characteristic of American society at both the individual and community levels, it could be fruitful to investigate how the penal system could produce some improvements in health outcomes.

A paramount item to address in future research is data collection and research design. To this point nearly all studies of the incarceration–health association employed secondary data. This approach presents important methodological and theoretical challenges. Methodologically, for example, many of these studies are vulnerable to selection bias. Theoretically, these data sets do not allow us to test several important hypotheses about the incarceration–health association because data collection was undertaken to answer other questions. Now that there is strong evidence that incarceration has consequences for individual, family, and community health, it is time to undertake large-scale projects that focus specifically on this association. These projects would involve original data collection aimed at and research designs capable of answering the most poignant theoretical questions now being posed in this research area. This type of original data collection would allow us to (a) address methodological limitations such as selection effects, (b) determine whether the health effects of incarceration are causal or spurious, and (c) undertake tests of theory capable of discovering the direct, indirect, and conditional causal pathways through which incarceration influences health.

Finally, our review is notable for what fell outside our specific scope of inquiry. For example, space limitations prevented us from systematically reviewing the rapidly expanding literature on the impact of incarceration on mental health outcomes.2 Similar to the literature on physical health, the literature on the mental health consequences of incarceration considers the impact on both inmates (Schnittker et al. 2012) and family members of those who are incarcerated (Turney et al. 2012, Wildeman et al. 2013). This important line of research is still emerging, and future research focused on clarifying the scope of incarceration's impact on mental health outcomes and the specific mechanisms that produce such effects would advance this research area. Similarly, we were able to only broadly consider how incarceration may disrupt family functioning in ways that are related to a host of developmental and health outcomes for both children and spouses of inmates (see Turney 2015, Turney & Wildeman 2015). Further inquiry into this area is important to determine the breadth and range of the collateral consequences of incarceration and to test the possible causal pathways linking incarceration and health.

CONCLUSION
In the last decade there has been a sustained research focus on the health consequences of incarceration. Sociologists across a range of subfields, including criminology, stratification, life course processes, family functioning, and medical sociology, have undertaken research on the topic. In this review we attempt to summarize this rapidly expanding literature while pointing to areas in which additional research is warranted. Despite the wealth of articles published in recent years, research in the area is still at its nascent stages, as is—from a historical context—our understanding of the penal system and its effects on society. As the number of individuals released from prison grows, and as they advance in age, research on the relationship between incarceration and health will continue to speak to a host of critical academic, social, and policy issues. To that end, we view the important work to date as a starting point for future research in the area.

        Given the text identify a series of relationships between variables that have a well defined direction and a clear textual backing. They can be correlational in statistical sense [being either direct or inverse correlations] or causational [direct cause, or inverse case (inversely affects)].
        For example, if a text says "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate" would be good variables. Variables that are implied but not directly stated by the text such as "education infilstructure" should not be included. 
        The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 
        or 'inconclusive'. The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
        The SupportText field of your output should include a section of verbatim from the text in addition to any comments you want to make about your output, without paraphrasing.
        Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices.

        The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "isCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "isCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```
        


Input begins:

        Abstract
Objective
To explore variability in the link between peer and adolescent drinking by parental drinking. Stress and differential susceptibility perspectives led to hypotheses that adolescents with drinking parents would be more reactive to peer drinking, but also to peer abstention.

Methods
Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health, regressions estimated whether the association between peer alcohol use and increased drinking among adolescents was moderated by parental drinking. A regions of significance test identified the level of peer drinking that predicted adolescent drinking in the context of parental drinking.

Results
Adolescents with binge-drinking parents were more likely to increase drinking at every level of peer drinking, supporting the stress perspective; such adolescents did not accrue benefits from abstaining peers, going against the differential susceptibility perspective.

Conclusions
Far from monolithic, peer influences on adolescent risky behaviors may require family environments and genetic predispositions conducive to those behaviors.

The norms and behaviors of peers are central to alcohol use in adolescence, but not all adolescents are equally susceptible to such peer influences (Johnston et al., 2011; Ennett et al., 2006). As such, studying the link between peer drinking and adolescent drinking has been a central part of efforts to curb risky behaviors and understand adolescent behavior more broadly (Crosnoe, Muller, and Frank, 2004; Kandel, 1996). A stress process model (Pearlin et al., 1981) suggests that the influence of social environments on problem behaviors is amplified among those already most vulnerable to engaging in these behaviors. Consequently, peer influences on drinking may vary based on whether adolescents are already vulnerable to drinking due to other formative influences, including, for example, their parents. Indeed, parents can model problematic drinking behavior for their children, increase opportunities and motivations for their children to drink, and pass down genetically heritable traits associated with drinking to their children (Chassin et al., 2013; Dick et al., 2006). Thus, the interplay of peer and parent drinking, not just each on its own, is likely to factor into whether and how much adolescents drink.

In this spirit, this study explores the degree to which parental problem drinking moderates the link between peer drinking and adolescent drinking over time. Integrating theory across medical sociology and developmental psychology, we posit and test two hypotheses. Following the stress response perspective (and the closely connected diathesis stress perspective), the first hypothesis is that a negative peer environment would matter most to adolescent drinking in the context of a family vulnerability, so that the link between peer drinking and adolescent drinking would be magnified when parents drink. The differential susceptibility perspective makes this same prediction but, at the same time, contends that people in vulnerable circumstances will be more reactive to both negative and positive influences in their environmental contexts—more affected by risks and getting more from resources. Following this perspective, the alternate hypothesis is that the link between having peers who drink and adolescent drinking will be stronger among adolescents whose parents are problem drinkers, as will the link between having abstaining peers and adolescent drinking.

These hypotheses will be tested by examining how the interaction of peer drinking and parental drinking predicts changes in adolescent drinking over time with data on adolescents in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health). The adjudication between the stress and differential susceptibility hypotheses is supported by a region of significance test that points to the thresholds at which a predictor becomes a significant risk or protective factor for an outcome in the presence of a moderator (Fraley, 2014; Roisman et al., 2012). This research can identify unique subsets of the adolescent population in need of support and bring new conceptual and methodological tools to the sociological study of health.

Peer and Parental Influences on Adolescent Drinking
That adolescents tend to look highly similar to their peers in terms of drinking is well-established (Crosnoe, 2006; Schulenberg et al., 1999; Kandel, 1996; Aseltine, 1995). The heightened sensitivity to social influence that is a hallmark of adolescence—reflecting a combination of individuation from parents and socioemotional and brain development—increases the degree to which adolescents are attuned to and shaped by what their peers are doing (Steinberg, 2008). Adolescents, therefore, are susceptible to the influence of alcohol-using peers, above and beyond the powerful selection effects of homophily. As such, researchers have increasingly turned their attention to the variability within this general pattern—if adolescents are generally influenced by their peers in terms of drinking, are there specific groups of adolescents who are not or who are even more than usual? Elucidating such variability helps to identify adolescents most and least at risk (Crosnoe, 2006; Crosnoe, Muller, and Frank, 2004).

Two otherwise similar adolescents may differ in whether their drinking is influenced by peers depending on, for example, their contexts or their own developing personal characteristics (Paschall, Lipperman-Kreda, and Grube, 2014; Crosnoe and Riegle-Crumb, 2007). A stress model—stress process in medical sociology, diathesis stress in developmental psychology—provides a lens through which to view this variability because it considers differential exposure/vulnerability as possible explanations for adverse outcomes. Indeed, the stress model asserts that some adolescents are more reactive to stressors (e.g., peer behaviors) because of prior histories, genetic predispositions, or current circumstances (e.g., parental behaviors). Thus, some adolescents are more vulnerable to the influences of alcohol-using peers than others, and they will be more likely to go along with peers while others resist or are unaffected.

Although the vulnerability central to the stress model can come in many forms, we focus on parental problem drinking, which is directly associated with adolescent drinking via multiple mechanisms. Parents model alcohol use and provide opportunities for adolescents to drink through their permissive attitudes toward drinking or the availability of alcohol in their homes (Abar, Abar, and Turrisi, 2009; Komro et al., 2007). Parents also influence personal development via the intergenerational transmission of genes specific to alcohol use and/or addiction or related behaviors and conditions (e.g., risk taking or impulsivity) that may increase the likelihood of drinking (Dick et al., 2006; Whitfield et al., 2004). Consequently, parents who drink tend to have adolescents who drink through complex developmental processes that connect social life and biology (Chassin et al., 2013; Chassin, Pitts, and Prost, 2002).

Notably, the consideration of vulnerability and reactivity in the stress model shifts attention away from the direct influences of peers and parents on adolescent drinking to the interplay between these two influences. In other words, we are not testing if peer and parental drinking are both associated with adolescent drinking on their own but instead whether the association between peer drinking and adolescent drinking is moderated by parental problem drinking. In line with the stress model, the first of our hypotheses is that adolescents who are exposed to problem drinking in the home may be vulnerable to drinking within their peer groups and, therefore, drink more. If drinking is problematic, they would be at a double disadvantage.

A Different Kind of Parent-Peer Interplay
The stress model focuses on the interplay between personal vulnerability and environmental risk and how these amplify each other, but the other side of the interplay between the peer and parental drinking may be more positive. The differential susceptibility model, which has been prominent in developmental research on psychopathology (Belsky and Pluess, 2009), highlights this positive side. It contends that vulnerable youth are more reactive to their social environments in general—they are more at risk in the face of negative influences, but have more to gain from positive resources. In other words, they suffer when environments are unhealthy and benefit when environments are healthy (Belsky, Bakermans-Kranenburg, and van IJzendoorn, 2007). Applying this model to the issues at hand, adolescents who are vulnerable to drinking because their parents are problem drinkers will have unhealthier behavior when immersed in peer contexts characterized by high levels of drinking, but will have healthier behavior when they are surrounded by peers who abstain from drinking. In the former case, peers facilitate the translation of vulnerability into drinking behavior, and, in the latter, peers block or buffer it.

In line with this model, our examination of the moderating role of parental problem drinking in the link between peer and adolescent drinking is guided by a second hypothesis, which is that having peers who drink will be more positively associated with adolescent drinking when parents problem drink while having peers who do not drink will be more negatively associated with adolescent drinking when parents problem drink. As described next, the regions of significance test developed as part of the theoretical discussion of diathesis stress and differential susceptibility in developmental psychopathology will be leveraged to consider this interplay among adolescents, peers, and parents in the etiology of a major public health issue.

Methods
Data and Sample
Add Health followed a nationally representative sample of adolescents beginning in 1994 with an in-school survey of 90,118 students in 132 middle and high schools across the United States (Harris et al., 2009). The in-school survey was used to create a nationally representative sample of 20,745 students for the core in-home interview sample. Wave I in-home interviews were conducted in 1995 when students were aged 11–18. Additional in-home interviews were conducted in 1996 (Wave II; ages 12–18, with Wave I high school seniors excluded), 2001–2002 (Wave III; ages 18–26), and 2007–2008 (Wave IV; ages 24–32).

Given our focus on adolescence, we used data from Waves I and II, necessarily excluding high school seniors in Wave I, who were purposely dropped from the core Add Health sampling frame in Wave II. We retained all youth with valid longitudinal sampling weights (necessary to adjust for study design effects and to correct for differential attrition across waves). The final sample included 13,568 students, with all missing data within this sample estimated through full-maximum likelihood estimation (FIML).

Measures
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for all study variables.

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics for Study Variables
Mean	SD	Percent
Drinking variables
Adolescent (Wave II)	1.091	1.519	
Adolescent (Wave I)	1.076	1.474	
Peer (Wave I)	1.084	1.202	
Parent binge (Wave I)			12.76
Covariates			
Gender (female)			51.27
Grade level	9.339	1.465	
Parent education			
Less than high school			12.86
High school graduate			29.78
Some postsecondary			20.51
College graduate			24.26
Postgraduate degree			12.60
Family structure (two-parent)			53.10
Race/ethnicity			
Non-Hispanic white			51.75
Non-Hispanic black			19.62
Hispanic			16.94
Non-Hispanic Asian			6.21
Other/multiracial			5.49
Number of friends	3.038	2.591	
Involvement with friends	2.109	1.066	
Friends’ GPA	2.858	0.710	
Friends’ school attachment	3.702	0.817	
Friends’ educational expectations	6.486	1.924	
Notes: n = 13,568; responses for adolescent and peer drinking variables range from 0 to 6 with increasing frequency of alcohol use; school attachment is a scale from 1 to 5 with increasing attachment; educational expectations is estimations of graduating from college on a scale from 0 to 8 with increasing likelihood.
Adolescent Drinking
Consistent with past research with Add Health (e.g., Crosnoe, Benner, and Schneider, 2012; Johnson, 2004), self-reports were used to measure alcohol use at Waves I and II. Adolescents reported how often they drank alcohol in the past year, with responses ranging from 0 (none) to 6 (daily or nearly daily). The Wave II version served as the outcome, the Wave I version as the lagged control variable.

Peer Drinking
Respondents in the in-school survey nominated up to five female and five male friends, most of whom also participated in Add Health. This network design allowed for the characteristics of most nominated friends to be measured directly from those friends’ survey responses (Crosnoe, Muller, and Frank, 2004; Cavanagh, 2004; Haynie, 2001; Moody, 2001). Peer drinking, therefore, was the mean of self-reported alcohol use (same responses described above) for all nominated friends in the sample. This network measure minimizes problems associated with adolescents’ overestimation of their peers’ similarity to them and their incomplete information about their peers (Kandel, 1996). At the same time, the network measures are imperfect, particularly given the high rate of missingness. A few schools that participated in Add Health did not allow the in-school survey to be administered, and these respondents were missing friendship nominations. Missingness also occurred when friends were nominated outside Add Health schools or did not participate in Add Health for some reason. FIML (described below) helps to address these biases. Further, a sensitivity check replicated all analyses for the subsample of respondents with valid peer data; the results were consistent with the full sample results.

Parent Problem Drinking
In the Wave I parent survey, parents self-reported their frequency of various types of drinking. From these reports, we created a binary variable differentiating between parents who had recent experiences with binge drinking (i.e., has had five or more drinks in one sitting in the last month) and those who had not.

Covariates
A set of characteristics was measured to account for sociodemographic variability and spurious factors. These covariates included adolescent gender (1 = female), grade in school, parent's education (1 = less than high school, 2 = high school graduate, 3 = some postsecondary education, 4 = college graduate, 5 = postgraduate degree), family structure (1 = lives with both biological parents), and race/ethnicity (dummy variables for non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic, non-Hispanic Asian, and other/multiracial).

To gauge different contexts of peer drinking, we also controlled for several peer characteristics. Involvement with friends was the sum of four items (1 = yes) that gauged the frequency with which adolescents had gone to the friend's house, talked on the telephone with the friend, spent time with the friend outside of school, and hung out with the friend. This value was averaged across all nominated friends (Cavanagh, 2004). Further, data from the in-school survey were used to capture peer academic engagement in three ways. For each of these three measures, we created an individual-level measure and then aggregated it across all nominated peers. The individual-level measures used in this aggregation process were grade point average (self-reported grades in core subjects on conventional four-point scale), school attachment (average of self-reported degree to which adolescents felt close to people at their school, a part of their school, and happy to be at their school in the past year on a scale from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree), and educational expectations (adolescents’ estimations that they will graduate from college on a scale from 0 = no chance to 8 = it will happen).

Analytical Strategy
This study considered variability in the link between peer drinking (focal predictor) and adolescent drinking (outcome) according to parental problem drinking (moderator). To examine this variability, we estimated a series of models regressing Wave II adolescent drinking on measures of peer drinking, parent drinking, and the interaction between the two (note: both peer and parent measures were grand-mean centered). These models controlled for the full set of covariates as well as the Wave I measure of adolescent drinking, creating a lagged modeling strategy that effectively captured changes in drinking across waves (Glazerman, Levy, and Myers, 2003). These regression models were estimated in Mplus (Muthén and Muthén, 1998–2006). FIML estimated exogenous variance for missingness, so that all cases in the sample were retained even if they had missing data on individual variables. Moreover, we employed the cluster feature in Mplus to account for students being nested within schools in the sampling frame as well as the longitudinal sampling weight to address differential probability of being included in the frame and differential cross-wave attrition from the sample.

Our pair of hypotheses concerned the different forms that a significant peer drinking × parent drinking interaction might take. We explored this form using the regions of significance examination. Conventionally, significant interactions are interpreted with a simple slope analysis that calculates the association between the predictor and outcome at high and low levels of the moderator. Recently, Roisman et al. (2014) put forward a statistical test, regions of significance, that gauges the significance of the full range of values for the interaction. Here, we computed the regions of significance for the moderation of the association between peer drinking and adolescent drinking by parent drinking using an online calculator employing the Johnson-Neyman technique (Preacher, Curran, and Bauer, 2006). This tool (see 〈http://www.yourpersonality.net/interaction/〉) was developed by Fraley as a supplement to the review of interaction effects by Roisman et al. (2012). By inputting the intercept, regression coefficients for the predictor, moderator, and interaction term, variances of the predictor, moderator, and interaction term, covariances of the predictor and moderator, and degrees of freedom, the application produces a graph plotting the interaction and calculates regions of significance with respect to the predictor and the moderator.

This regions of significance test gives evidence for differential susceptibility if the interaction term involves crossed lines and the association between the outcome and moderator is significant for both low and high values of the predictor; in this case, if an adolescent with drinking parents had lower drinking than other youth when peers abstained and had greater drinking than other youth when peers drank. On the other hand, if the regions of significance determine that the association between the outcome and moderator is significant only for high values of the predictor regardless of whether the interaction lines cross, it points to a stress model; in this case, an adolescent with problem-drinking parents drank more than other youth when peers drank, but did not seem to derive any more benefit than other youth from having abstaining peers.

As a sensitivity check (results not shown), we compared the three peer academic engagement variables to the peer drinking variable, given that prosocial behaviors among peers (e.g., being engaged in school) better tapped the idea of peer resources in the differential susceptibility perspective than the absence of a problem behavior among peers (e.g., peer abstention). We estimated these parental drinking × peer interactions and interpreted them with the regions of significance test. This sensitivity check revealed the same pattern as peer drinking.

Results
Peer, Parent, and Adolescent Drinking
To begin, we examined whether a risk factor (peer drinking) and a vulnerability factor (parental problem drinking) were each independently and interactively associated with adolescent drinking. Table 2 presents the results. Model 2 included the measure of drinking among peers as a predictor of Wave II adolescent drinking along with all covariates and the Wave I measure of adolescent drinking, Model 2 added the parental drinking measure, and Model 3 added the interaction between drinking among peers and parental drinking.

Table 2. Results of Models Predicting Wave II Adolescent Drinking
Estimate (SE)
Model 1	Model 2	Model 3
Peer drinking	0.062*	0.061*	0.061*
(0.028)	(0.028)	(0.028)
Parent binge drinking		0.242***	0.236***
(0.060)	(0.060)
Peer drinking × parent drinking			0.183*
(0.083)
Covariates
Female	−0.140**	−0.134**	−0.135**
(0.044)	(0.044)	(0.045)
Grade	0.189***	0.192***	0.192***
(0.014)	(0.014)	(0.014)
Parent education	0.027	0.031	0.028
(0.021)	(0.021)	(0.021)
Two bio-parent households	−0.182***	−0.162***	−0.158***
(0.033)	(0.033)	(0.034)
Alcohol use at Wave I	0.004	0.003	0.004
(0.013)	(0.013)	(0.013)
Race/ethnicity (ref: non-Hispanic white)
Hispanic	−0.134*	−0.125†	−0.118†
(0.065)	(0.064)	(0.064)
Non-Hispanic black	−0.532***	−0.528***	−0.516***
(0.055)	(0.055)	(0.054)
Non-Hispanic Asian	−0.599***	−0.581***	−0.581***
(0.100)	(0.098)	(0.101)
Other/multiracial	−0.048	−0.046	−0.042
(0.093)	(0.093)	(0.094)
Number of friends	0.046***	0.045***	0.045***
(0.008)	(0.007)	(0.008)
Involvement with friends	0.217***	0.213***	0.214***
(0.019)	(0.019)	(0.020)
Friends’ GPA	−0.189***	−0.188***	−0.183***
(0.038)	(0.038)	(0.038)
Friends’ school attachment	−0.004	−0.004	−0.003
(0.030)	(0.031)	(0.030)
Friends’ educational expectations	0.016	0.017	0.016
(0.012)	(0.012)	(0.012)
n = 13,568; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, †p < 0.10.
In Models 1 and 2, both peer drinking and parent drinking significantly predicted adolescent drinking at Wave II, net of Wave I adolescent drinking (b = 0.06, p < 0.05 for peer drinking in Model 1; b = 0.24, p < 0.001 for parental drinking in Model 2). Every point increase on the scale of drinking among peers was associated with an increase in adolescent drinking between Waves I and II of about 5 percent of an SD on the Wave II drinking distribution. The difference between having a parent who had recently engaged in binge drinking and one who had not was equivalent to about 15 percent of an SD on that distribution.

Stress and Differential Susceptibility
In addition to the main effects of drinking among peers and parental drinking, their interaction was significant and positive (b = 0.18, p < 0.05). To interpret this interaction, we followed the conventional approach of calculating predicted Wave II drinking levels among adolescents with different combinations of drinking among peers (1 SD below and above the mean) and parental drinking (any recent experience with binge drinking vs. no such experience) with all other variables held to their sample means/modes. Figure 1 graphically depicts these predicted levels.

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Moderation of the Association Between Drinking Among Peers and Adolescent Drinking by Parental Drinking
When parents had no recent history of binge drinking, adolescent drinking at Wave II (net of Wave I drinking and the covariates) did not differ depending on the level of drinking among peers. In other words, peer drinking and adolescent drinking were not associated with each other among adolescents with parents who did not binge drink. Yet, among adolescents with binge-drinking parents, a gap opened up between those whose peers drank and those whose peers did not, with the former drinking more. Thus, in line with the stress model, adolescents with binge-drinking parents appeared to be more susceptible to the influences of drinking peers than other adolescents, who did not seem to be all that susceptible.

Graphing the interaction between peer and parent drinking indicated that vulnerability to drinking peers differed between adolescents with and without parents who had a recent history of binge drinking. What it did not do was identify at what point on the spectrum of peer drinking this increased vulnerability became meaningful. The differential susceptibility hypothesis contended that moderation could have two poles—heightened vulnerability to the negative influences of peers who drank and to the positive influences of peers who did not. The graph in Figure 1 suggests that such differential susceptibility was likely not occurring, as there seemed to be no point along the continuum of drinking among peers at which the children of binge-drinking parents had lower levels of drinking than the children of other parents (i.e., the interaction lines did not cross). Even without using the region of significance test, we could be reasonably sure that the interaction between drinking among peers and parental drinking fit the stress model better than the differential susceptibility model. The region of significance test, however, could still be informative by shedding light on the level of peer drinking that was significantly associated with adolescent drinking among adolescents with binge-drinking parents.

Figure 2 presents the interaction between peer and parent drinking in a different form than Figure 1. Based on the online calculator developed by Fraley (Roisman et al., 2012), it shows the region in which drinking among peers was significantly associated with adolescent drinking in the focal group of adolescents with binge-drinking parents (note that the units on the X and Y axes refer to SD increments).

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 2
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Regions of Significance in Interaction Between Drinking Among Peers and Parental Drinking as a Predictor of Adolescent Drinking
In this figure, adolescent drinking at Wave II tended to increase as peer drinking increased. The simple slope for adolescents with binge-drinking parents was 0.24 (p < 0.001). The simple slope for students with parents who had no recent history of binge drinking was also marginally significant, but of a smaller magnitude (0.06, p < 0.10). This difference in slopes confirmed the observed pattern in Figure 1 that the link between drinking among peers and adolescent drinking was stronger for adolescents with binge-drinking parents. The shaded region indicates the level at which the difference in slopes became statistically significant. At all points of drinking among peers above a Z-score of −1.135, adolescents with binge-drinking parents had significantly higher levels of drinking than those without such parents. A Z-score of −1 relates to 1 SD below the mean of peer drinking, effectively a value of zero on the peer drinking scale (i.e., the adolescents’ peers were nondrinkers). In other words, adolescents with binge-drinking parents became more vulnerable to having drinking peers than other adolescents once the level of drinking among those peers reached 1 SD below the mean of peer drinking; essentially, having peers who drank at any level. That the cross-over point on peer drinking (at a Z-score of −1.290) was below the lower bound of the region of significance is the best evidence for the stress model.

In terms of our hypotheses, therefore, we found support for the stress perspective but not for the differential susceptibility perspective. Adolescents with binge-drinking parents were more susceptible than other youth to what appeared to be negative influences of drinking among peers (i.e., high levels of drinking among peers associated with more adolescent drinking) but not to positive influences of peer abstention (i.e., peer abstention from drinking associated with less adolescent drinking). Furthermore, this apparent vulnerability of adolescents with binge-drinking parents to having peers who drank held for just about any level of peer drinking.

Discussion
Adolescence is a critical life course stage during which individuals undergo rapid social, psychological, and physical development. As they individuate from parents and establish peer networks, adolescents differ in how they respond to their social environments. One peer-influenced behavior that has received public and academic attention is adolescent drinking. Adolescents tend to drink more when their peers drink through a mixture of selection and socialization, but not all adolescents follow this pattern. We explored such variability by examining parental drinking as a moderator of the link between peer and adolescent drinking.

The results of this study did demonstrate a moderating role of parental problem drinking in this oft-studied association. Young people with parents who binge drank were more likely to drink if their peers were also drinkers. This pattern—closely aligned with the predictions of stress response and diathesis stress models—was not paired with a different but related pattern; namely, the prediction of the differential susceptibility model that parental drinking would increase the positive association between peer drinking and adolescent drinking, but also the negative association between peer abstention and adolescent drinking. Instead, region of significance testing showed that adolescents with binge-drinking parents were more vulnerable to drinking than other youth when their peers were drinkers—at any level—and did not appear to derive any more benefit than other youth from having peers who did not drink. Sensitivity analyses comparing peer academic engagement variables to peer drinking were performed to account for the fact that the absence of drinking in a peer group is not necessarily a peer resource. Tapping into three aspects of peer academic engagement as potential resources in the peer context, however, we again found support for a stress perspective, with no evidence of differential susceptibility. These results highlight three important themes.

First, some adolescents may be less susceptible to potentially negative norms and values among peers and better able to self-regulate based on the modeling, influence, and genetic heritability of their parents. This finding corresponds to research by Steinberg and Monahan (2007) showing that, although adolescents are generally more susceptible to peers than adults are, they may still develop resistance to peer influences when they have internal or external resources on which to draw. As a result, different processes may be at work among peers when particular vulnerabilities are, or are not, present. Given the limited nature of the peer and family data in our analyses, we were unable to understand processes within and among peer groups or intrafamily dynamics that could explain the elevated risk for drinking among adolescents with peers and parents who drank. Future research, however, needs to both unpack and contextualize these mechanisms.

Second, potential peer risks may be more important to understand than potential peer protective resources in the context of family vulnerabilities. At least in our sample of adolescents, moderation by parental drinking pointed to risky peer groups seeming to be worse for adolescents with parents who drank, not prosocial peer groups seeming to be better for them (both in terms of the absence of peer drinking or the presence of pro-academic norms among peers). Importantly, the lack of evidence for the positive side of differential susceptibility in this scenario is at odds with other research on drinking, such as a study by Olfson et al. (2014), indicating that associating with nondrinking peers was beneficial to teens with a genetic predisposition to drink. We are not ready to rule out that differential susceptibility is at work in the interplay of parents and peers and its role in adolescent drinking. Instead, we argue that a more extensive investigation of variability is in order. Among adolescents with binge-drinking parents, having abstaining peers might not matter in general, but it might matter to some. The key is to identify, in a systematic way, the ones for which it matters—in terms of other sources of vulnerability. Another possibility is that the differential susceptibility only emerges for some dimensions of adolescent drinking, such as the initiation of drinking or developmental increases and declines in drinking as adolescence unfolds (Chassin et al., 2013; Albert, Chein, and Steinberg, 2013). Certainly, as adolescents transition to adulthood, drinking becomes more normative and the influences of peers and parents may take on new forms. Similarly, perhaps gender or socioeconomic status conditions these pathways. Adolescent social life is gendered, for example, and friendship expectations differ between girls and boys, as does the acceptability and social benefits/costs of drinking. Drinking also plays more of a social role and influences social status as socioeconomic status increases (Crosnoe, 2011; Clark and Ayers, 1993). Future research should shed light on which adolescents are most vulnerable to peers’ risky behaviors when their family contexts also expose them to risk.

Third, the potentially dynamic and multidimensional role of parental drinking in adolescent drinking needs to be unpacked. Here, we saw that something long considered to be the most important factor in adolescent drinking (i.e., association with peers who drank) only mattered in the face of parental drinking. Why parental drinking had such a role was difficult to adjudicate in conventional designs. Clearly, it has a heritability component, but the behavioral influences of parents on adolescents go beyond heritability (Handley and Chassin, 2013). Genetically informed designs—behavioral genetics ACE models, for example, or models incorporating genetic traits known to raise the likelihood of drinking—can provide insight into these issues and need to be better leveraged in social science research on health behavior (Watson, Buchwald, and Harden, 2012; Dick et al., 2006). At the same time, social and psychological mechanisms by which parental drinking may be associated with adolescent drinking above and beyond genetic links need to be studied more explicitly. Is the channel of such influence about values, opportunities, self-medication, or something else? Moving forward with this line of research, however, scholars should consider alternative ways to measure parental drinking. One limitation of our analyses was the operationalization of parental drinking as binge drinking over a short time period. Exposing adolescents to binge drinking may be qualitatively different than exposing adolescents to casual drinking, and the consistency of that exposure likely also matters.

Theoretically, the relevance of this research on the interplay among parent, peer, and adolescent drinking goes beyond the specific conceptualizations of stress and differential susceptibility models. It also speaks to the transactional emphasis of many general perspectives on human development, such as developmental systems and life course (Johnson, Crosnoe, and Elder, 2011), that highlight how behavioral trajectories reflect the ongoing bidirectional relations between what is going on inside youth (e.g., biological and psychological processes) and what is going on outside them (e.g., proximate and distal contextual process) and how these transactions vary across diverse segments of the population. Research influenced by and informing such theoretical perspectives can then guide policy intervention by identifying who needs help in finer-tuned ways.

        Given the text identify a series of relationships between variables that have a well defined positive direction and a clear textual backing.
        For example, if a text says "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate" would be good variables. Variables that are implied but not directly stated by the text such as "education infilstructure" should not be included. 
        The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 
        or 'inconclusive'. The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
        The SupportText field of your output should include a section of verbatim from the text in addition to any comments you want to make about your output, without paraphrasing.
        Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices.

        The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "isCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "isCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```
        


Input begins:

        Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_
        The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. Correlations are also observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma, all of which impact substance use patterns and disparities within these communities. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.

        Given the text identify a series of relationships between variables that have a well defined positive direction and a clear textual backing.
        For example, if a text says "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate" would be good variables. Variables that are implied but not directly stated by the text such as "education infilstructure" should not be included. 
        The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 
        or 'inconclusive'. The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
        The SupportText field of your output should include a section of verbatim from the text in addition to any comments you want to make about your output, without paraphrasing.
        Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices.

        The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "isCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "isCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```
        


Input begins:

        Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_

        Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
        For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
        The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
        The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
        The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
        Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 
        
        The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

        Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
        [{'VariableOneName': 'Cognitive distraction', 'VariableTwoName': 'Rumination', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'Sadness', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Rumination', 'VariableTwoName': 'Sadness', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSA withdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Rumination Induction', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Induced distraction', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'MDD', 'VariableTwoName': 'Cardiovascular disease', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]
        End of relationships to fill in.
        


Input begins:

        The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. Correlations are also observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma, all of which impact substance use patterns and disparities within these communities. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.

        Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
        For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
        The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
        The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
        The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
        Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 
        
        The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

        Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
        [{'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance-related mortality', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Alcohol-related deaths', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Chronic liver disease', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Drug-related issues', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance use initiation', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance use rates', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Living on reservations', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Dropped out of school', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adults who drink', 'VariableTwoName': 'Heavy, episodic drinking patterns', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance availability', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Trauma exposure', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Family and peer networks', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Historical trauma', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]
        End of relationships to fill in.
        


Input begins:

        Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_

        Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
        For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
        The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
        The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
        The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
        Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 
        
        The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

        Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
        {'Relations': [{'VariableOneName': 'Cognitive distraction', 'VariableTwoName': 'Rumination', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'Sadness', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Rumination', 'VariableTwoName': 'Sadness', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSA withdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Rumination Induction', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Induced distraction', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'MDD', 'VariableTwoName': 'Cardiovascular disease', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]}
        End of relationships to fill in.
        


Input begins:

        The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. Correlations are also observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma, all of which impact substance use patterns and disparities within these communities. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.

        Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
        For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
        The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
        The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
        The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
        Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 
        
        The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

        Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
        {'Relations': [{'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance-related mortality', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Alcohol-related deaths', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Chronic liver disease', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Drug-related issues', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance use initiation', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance use rates', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Living on reservations', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Dropped out of school', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adults who drink', 'VariableTwoName': 'Heavy, episodic drinking patterns', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance availability', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Trauma exposure', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Family and peer networks', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Historical trauma', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]}
        End of relationships to fill in.
        


Input begins:

Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
{'Relations': [{'VariableOneName': 'Cognitive distraction', 'VariableTwoName': 'Rumination', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'Sadness', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Rumination', 'VariableTwoName': 'Sadness', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSA withdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Rumination Induction', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Induced distraction', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'MDD', 'VariableTwoName': 'Cardiovascular disease', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]}
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. Correlations are also observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma, all of which impact substance use patterns and disparities within these communities. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
{'Relations': [{'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance-related mortality', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Alcohol-related deaths', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Chronic liver disease', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Drug-related issues', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance use initiation', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance use rates', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Living on reservations', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Dropped out of school', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adults who drink', 'VariableTwoName': 'Heavy, episodic drinking patterns', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance availability', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Trauma exposure', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Family and peer networks', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Historical trauma', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]}
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

Abstract Background: Pre-conceptual prevention programs geared towards reducing alcohol-exposed pregnancy (AEP) typically emphasize behavioral change of alcohol use and birth control exclusively, but rarely consider other important AEP predictors that may affect behavioral change. Intimate partner violence (IPV) substantially relates to AEP and to AEP predictors, however, few studies have tested if IPV is a unique indicator of prospective AEP risk, as both a main effect and a contextual influence on alcohol use or birth control. Methods: Using Waves II and III of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health), multilevel logistic regression models were estimated, in which IPV and birth control (both within-person and between-person) and adolescent alcohol use (between-person only) were examined as unique predictors of AEP compared to both non-pregnancy and non-AEP outcomes over up-to-5 sexual relationships. Interactions between within-person and between-person IPV, and birth control or alcohol use were also tested. Results: Within-person and between-person IPV significantly related to higher odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy and non-AEP. Adolescent alcohol use had similarly increased odds for AEP when compared to non-pregnancy or non-AEP outcomes. Only between-person birth control use related to higher odds for AEP compared to non-pregnancy and non-AEP. Between-person IPV also moderated adolescent alcohol use on odds of AEP, such that infrequent adolescent drinkers had higher odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy or non-AEP if they experienced IPV over their relationships. Conclusions: IPV is a substantial predictor for AEP as both a direct influence within relationships (within-person) and between individuals (between-person). Intervention and prevention programs focused on reducing AEP may benefit from including IPV-specific curricula. Approximately 10% of women in the United States consume alcohol while pregnant (Popova et al., 2017). Consequently, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder is one of the most common birth defects in the U.S., with rates ranging from 0.1 per 1000 to 100 per 1000 births, depending upon measurement (May et al., 2009; May et al., 2018). Although there is considerable attention and effort devoted to alcohol use cessation in pregnancy (Chang, 2009; Mengel et al., 2006; Nilsen, 2009), a large proportion of AEP involves drinking prior to learning of pregnancy status (McCormack et al., 2017). Thus, many prevention programs focus on reducing AEP prior to pregnancy through decreasing alcohol use and increasing pregnancy preventative measures (e.g., Floyd et al., 1999). These programs demonstrate moderate success, however, they often fail to address overarching contexts that can facilitate and maintain these behaviors, which may make behaviors harder to change. Intimate partner violence (IPV) is a particularly important risk factor for AEP, as well as a risk factor for alcohol and birth control use. The current study examines the link between IPV and AEP from a prospective, preconceptual lens, while controlling for other preconceptual AEP risk behaviors, testing the potential importance of including IPV as an AEP risk factor to address in preconceptual AEP prevention programs. Go to: Links between IPV and AEP IPV strongly associates with AEP (Anderson et al., 2014; Kitsantas et al., 2015; Li et al., 2012; Skagerstrom et al., 2011). A main reason for this may be that IPV victimization is both a precedent of alcohol use (Capaldi et al., 2012; Foran & O’Leary, 2008) and an antecedent (Devries et al., 2014; Derrik & Testa, 2017; Simmons et al., 2015). IPV also relates to lower levels of contraceptive use (Bergman & Stockman, 2015; Deutsch, in press; Maxwell et al., 2015). Consequently, unintended pregnancy, another predictor of AEP (McDonald et al., 2014), is also associated with IPV (Miller et al., 2010; Pallitto et al., v 2005). Underlying mechanisms for the association between IPV and AEP are unclear. Most research examining this association is descriptive. However, associations between IPV and alcohol use can be explained by broader relationship conflict (e.g., Collibee & Furman, 2018; Eckhard et al., 2015; Leonard & Quigley, 1999) and personal coping strategies (e.g., Schumacher et al., 2008; Ivory & Kambouropoulos, 2012; Leonard & Eiden, 2007). Given that IPV can continue during pregnancy, or that pregnancy can contribute to new instances of IPV (James et al., 2013), pregnancy may not be a sufficient deterrent for reducing alcohol use, if underlying IPV-related shared variables strongly maintain levels of alcohol use. Additionally, substance use coercion is a form of IPV itself (Rivera et al., 2015; Warshaw et al., 2014). Thus, alcohol misuse, even within pregnancy, can be maintained in part by their IPV perpetrating partners. There are also underlying mechanisms explaining the association between IPV and lower birth control use. IPV-related lower birth control is associated with coercive control motives within a relationship (Tanha et al., 2010). Reproductive coercion, in which individuals gain power over their partners by removing their partners’ reproductive agency, relates to other forms of IPV (Katz et al., 2017). Pregnancy coercion, another form of IPV reproductive control, can also explain higher rates of unintended pregnancies in IPV-marked relationships (Miller et al., 2010). Although some research indicates that AEP is more prominent in older women (e.g., Harrison & Sidebottom, 2009), pathways between alcohol use, IPV, and low birth control use start in adolescence, (Roberts et al., 2005; Silverman et al., 2001; Teitelman et al., 2008). Therefore, the association between these variables has a strong developmental context and may require addressing underlying long-standing cognitive schemas or behavioral habits. Taken together, IPV, alcohol use, low levels of contraception, unintended pregnancy, and AEP may form long-term patterns of association with one another. However, more research is required to understand the genuine ways in which IPV functions as a potential AEP risk factor. It may be important to see if IPV strengthens other AEP risk factors, given the cyclic association between risk variables. In addition, although most studies examining AEP predictors only compare AEP to women who do not drink during pregnancy (e.g., Anderson et al., 2014; Kisantas et al., 2015) this does not accurately inform preconceptual prevention programs, which emphasize both reducing alcohol use and overall pregnancy. Prospective research that can compare AEP predictors to outcomes that are more favorable than AEP (non-pregnancy and non-drinking pregnancy) may provide insight for prevention programs. Go to: Pre-conceptual AEP prevention programs The most common format of AEP prevention programs are brief interventions emphasizing motivated behavioral change (e.g., Ceperich & Ingersoll, 2011 Floyd et al., 2007; Ingersoll et al., 2013). Interventions can include motivational interview counseling, assessment feedback, and contraception counseling (Velasquez et al., 2013), although there are also self-guided formats (e.g., Tenkku et al., 2011). Reduced drinking and increased birth control use is guided by a process of self-evaluation and developing plans of change for levels of alcohol use and birth control use (Floyd et al., 2007; Velasquez et al., 2010). The brevity of these programs makes it scalable and easy to implement without requiring a large number of resources, which can be crucial in resource-poor, in-need populations. Success of preconceptual AEP prevention programs is typically defined as either post-program decrease in alcohol use and/or an increase in birth control. These programs do achieve both of these aims (Floyd et al., 2007; Hutton et al., 2014), but have more success in increasing birth control than reducing alcohol use (e.g., Farrell-Caranhan, et al., 2013; Hanson et al., 2017; Wilton, et al., 2013). In other words, programs are more successful at reducing the number of overall potential pregnancies potentially exposed to alcohol, compared to reducing the amount of alcohol consumed that may affect the remaining pregnancies. One potential reason for this may be that these programs tend to focus exclusively on individual-level behavioral change, and do not necessarily account for environments that may provide substantial barriers for change. For example, women in relationships marked by IPV may have a more difficult time either trying to reduce alcohol misuse (e.g., out of a higher need for immediate coping) or trying to obtain birth control (out of fear of partner reactions or even due to active resistance from the partner; de Bocanegra et al., 2010). Go to: Current Study The purpose of this study is to explore ways in which IPV may serve as a risk factor for AEP. Although IPV is a known predictor of AEP, it will be important to know if IPV has contextual, moderating influences on other AEP predictors, particularly those emphasized as risk factors in preconceptual prevention programs. As the goals of preconceptual AEP prevention programs are to 1) reduce the number of pregnancies by increasing contraceptive use, and 2) reduce AEP by reducing alcohol use within pregnancies, we compared three outcomes: AEP, non-pregnancy, and no-alcohol-exposed pregnancy (nAEP.) Specifically, we wanted to know if IPV was a unique risk factor for AEP, controlling for birth control use and alcohol use. Utilizing a multi-level, longitudinal design, we were able to examine if IPV was a unique risk factor a) within people, over relationships, and b) between individuals. We hypothesized that within relationships, IPV would relate to higher odds of AEP. In addition, those who reported experiencing higher levels of IPV averaged over all relationships would have higher odds of AEP compared to those who reported lower or no levels of IPV averaged over all relationships. We also hypothesized the effects of birth control use and alcohol use would be similar to prior research. Higher alcohol use would relate to higher odds of AEP, and that higher birth control use would relate to lower odds of AEP (although perhaps only when comparing AEP to non-pregnancy). We also examined IPV as a potential moderating context. As IPV relates to both higher alcohol use and lower birth control, it is possible that IPV strengthens alcohol use and birth control effects on the odds of AEP. Therefore, we hypothesized that IPV would strengthen the positive effect that alcohol use has on the odds of AEP, and would strengthen the negative effect that birth control use has on the odds of AEP. We included controls of childhood abuse and adolescent intimate partner violence, as well as time-varying contextual variables of the age at the start of relationship and relationship duration. Childhood abuse was included as it is a predictor of AEP (Frankenberger et al., 2015; Whitfield et al., 2003), intimate partner violence victimization (Renner & Slack, 2006) and alcohol use and abuse in adolescence and adulthood (e.g., Dube et al., 2002; Shin et al., 2009). Adolescent intimate partner violence was also included due to relationships between adolescent and young adult re-victimization (Gomez, 2011). Go to: Method Participants Participants were from Wave 2 (WII) and 3 (WIII) of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health). A nationally-representative U.S. sample was first assessed at grades 7 – 12 in 1994–95 (WI), and then followed up in 1996 (WII), 2000–2001 (WIII) and 2004–2005 (Wave 4). Women who completed WII and WIII, reported more than one WIII romantic relationship, and reported alcohol onset by WIII were included in the present analyses. The final sample included 3460 observations for 2097 participants. Measures Adult (WIII) Pregnancy status. Pregnancy status was a three-category variable indicating non-pregnancy (0) nAEP (1) or AEP pregnancy (2) within each romantic relationship. Participants were asked detailed questions about each completed/current pregnancy, and each pregnancy was linked to a reported romantic/sexual relationship. AEP was specifically assessed by the question “During this pregnancy, how often did you drink alcoholic beverages?” for each pregnancy. Options ranged from 0 (never) to 4 (almost every day). This was collapsed to a binary AEP/non-AEP variable. Multiple pregnancies within a single relationship were aggregated. The non-AEP pregnancy code indicated no alcohol exposure for all reported pregnancies within that romantic/sexual relationship. An AEP pregnancy code indicated at least 1 alcohol-exposed pregnancy for all pregnancies within the specific romantic/sexual relationship. Adult (WIII) Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) Victimization. Respondents were asked about having had experienced physical IPV by every sexual partner they reported in WIII. This measure was adapted from the revised Conflicts and Tactics Scale (CTS2; Straus et al., 1996). Physical IPV was measured by asking how often one’s partner a) “has threatened you with violence, pushed or shoved you, or thrown something at you that could hurt”1, b) “has slapped, hit, or kicked you” or if “you had an injury such as a sprain, bruise, or cut because of a fight with (partner). Items were initially measured using a 7 point scale, from 0 (never) to 6 (more than 20 times), with an extra item for indicating that “this hasn’t happened in the past year, but did happen before then”. Items were re-coded with a binary absence/presence for the prevalence of each indicator of physical IPV (see Straus, 2004). The final score was the sum score for the three items. Adult (WIII) Consistent Birth Control Use: Participants were asked about their use of condoms and birth control for every sexual relationship that they reported in WIII. For every partner, individuals were asked if they had (vaginal) sex on one or more than one occasion. Those who reported having had sex only one time with each specific partner were asked if they had used any birth control, and for those that reported use, what birth control was used (respondents could choose up to three methods). Those who reported having had sex more than one time with each specific partner were asked if they used any birth control/what types of birth control for the first and most recent time they had sex. Individuals were coded as having had consistent birth control use if they reported using any effective birth control (condom, birth control pills, vaginal sponge, foam/jelly, diaphragm, IUD, Norplant, ring, Depo Provera or contraceptive film) for their only or both first and most recent times having had sex. Although the different birth control methods within the consistent birth control group may have varying levels of efficacy/failure (e.g., Kost et al., 2008), we chose to group these together due to the small sample sizes of methods other than condom use and hormonal birth control. Those who reported no birth control use at any time, either first or most recent times or those who reported using only withdrawal or the rhythm method for their BC were coded as having inconsistent birth control use. Adolescent (WII) IPV victimization was derived from a measure assessing WII reports of up to six sexual/romantic partners (up to three romantic and three non-romantic) they had in the past year (since the last interview at WI). Similar to the WIII measure, participants were asked if their partner(s) had ever threatened them with violence, pushed or shoved the participant or thrown something at the participant that could hurt them. However, these were assessed as binary, not frequency variables. These items were summed for each partner and then averaged across partners. Adolescent (WII) Alcohol Use Frequency. Alcohol use in adolescence was assessed via a past-year frequency variable at WII. This score was initially re-coded with dummy variables to account for abstainers, however, non-abstaining individuals who reported no past year use were also included in this category, as this was a small proportion of individuals (n = 77, 2.61%), and such models performed poorly when examining interactions, most likely due to small cell sizes. Therefore, there were two dummy codes reflecting three categories: abstainers/non-abstaining non-users, infrequent drinkers (those who reported drinking once a month or less), and moderate-to-high drinkers, who reported drinking at least two times a month.2 Control Variables. Two variables were included to contextualize the WIII time-varying romantic relationships. Length of each sexual relationship was calculated by subtracting the reported start and end dates (past relationship) or by subtracting the start and the interview date (current relationship). This variable was re-coded into an eight-point scale, ranging from 1 day (0) to more than 4 years (7). Age at start of each relationship was assessed by subtracting participants’ birth date from the reported start date of the relationship. Total number of adolescent (WII) relationships was added as a control for the WII physical violence victimization variable, to distinguish meaning between those who reported either no physically violent relationships or no relationships (both of which would result in scores of 0). This was assessed by counting the number of romantic relationship partners endorsed in the WII relationship measure. Childhood abuse was conceptualized as mistreatment by parents or adult caregivers prior to 6th grade (measured in WIII). Participants reported how often adults (parents or other adult caregivers) had slapped, hit, or kicked them, and how often they had “touched you in a sexual way, forced you to touch him or her in a sexual way, or forced you to have sexual relations”. Reporting physical or sexual abuse was coded with a “1” while reporting no physical or sexual abuse was coded with a “0”. Finally, age at WII was included to contextualize the adolescent alcohol use (e.g., contextualize differences between a 13-year-old drinker versus an 18-year-old drinker). Go to: Analytic Plan A generalized multi-level model nesting relationship within person-level effects compared pregnancy outcomes (AEP versus nAEP or non-pregnancy). This included four relationship-varying effects: IPV, consistent birth control use, age at the start of relationship, and length of relationship. Adolescent alcohol use frequency, IPV/relationship ratio, and the number of romantic partners, along with child abuse and race were considered non-relationship varying (between-person) variables. A main model was first estimated, as well as four models that examined two-way interactions between IPV and either birth control use, or adolescent alcohol use. Two IPV × adolescent alcohol use interactions were estimated: a cross-level within-person IPV × between-person alcohol use interaction, and a between-person IPV × between-person alcohol use interaction. For interactions between IPV and birth control use, there were four possibilities to explore: two cross-level interactions (a within-person IPV × between-person birth control interaction, and a within-person birth control and between-person IPV interaction), and two single-level interactions (within-person or between person only interactions). Only the first five relationships were included in this model due to low numbers in both the number of reported relationships after 5, as well as the number of reported relationships after 5 that also included pregnancies. Although individuals reported up to 48 relationships, 81.87% participants reported 1 – 5 relationships and 91.06% of relationships with pregnancy outcomes were reported for relationships 1 – 5. Person-means centering was used to assess the direct effects of within-person and between-person effects (Curran & Bauer, 2011) for IPV, age at the start of relationship, and length of relationship. A grand-means centered approach was used for the birth control variable (person-means centering is not advisable for binary variables). All models were estimated using Mplus TWOLEVEL COMPLEX function, which accounts for the stratified sampling and complex survey weights, and a robust maximum likelihood estimator to account for missingness of data. Go to: Results Total number of relationships reported were: 2 relationships (26.51%), 3 relationships (21.16%), 4 relationships (16.27%) and 5+ relationships (36.06%3). Table 1 presents the correlations and means/frequencies for all variables. Table 1. Correlations and means/frequencies of all variables across all relationships 1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11	12 1. Total Pregnancies	-											 2. Total AEP (for pregnancies only)	0.20**	-										 3. Average IPV Victimization Across Relationships	0.27**	0.13*	-									 4. Average Consistent BC Use Across Relationships	−0.29**	−0.11**	−0.17**	-								 5. Average Age at Start of relationship(s)	−0.08**	0.02	−0.04*	0.08**	-							 6. Average Length of Relationship(s)	0.24**	−0.10**	0.14**	−0.14**	−0.16**	-						 7. Adolescent Frequency of Drinking	0.11**	0.16**	0.10**	−0.04*	−0.01	0.06**	-					 8. Adolescent Physical IPV	0.15**	0.05	0.16**	−0.06**	−0.01	0.08**	0.10**	-				 9. Adolescent Total Sexual/Romantic Partners	0.05**	0.01	0.06**	−0.01	−0.15	0.02	0.18**	0.09**	-			 10. Child Abuse	0.05**	0.11**	0.12**	−0.08**	−0.03	−0.01	0.04	0.01	0.03	-		 11. Race	0.08**	0.04	0.03	−0.10**	0.06**	0.04*	−.07**	0.01-	0.04**	0.11**	-	 12. Age	0.14**	0.02	0.05**	−0.01	0.51**	0.19**	.20**	0.11**	0.14**	0.01	0.08**	-  Mean (SD) [Range] / Frequency												 0: 63.22% 1: 27.55% 2: 8.32% 3 – 9: 0.91%	0: 84.97 % 1: 13.20 % 2 – 3: 1.83%	0.62 (1.06) [0 – 6]	0.61 (0.37) [0 – 1]	19.06 (1.76) [15 – 26]	3.42 (1.64) [0 – 7]	1.48 (1.43)5	0.11 (0.39) [0 – 3]	0.91 (0.95) [0 – 5]	0.32 (0.47)	W: 56.59% B: 20.56% L: 15.01% A:6.26% AIAN:1.58%	16.08 (1.56) Open in a separate window *p<.05; **p<.01 Multilevel Models Multilevel models were first tested to see if random slopes were necessary in addition to a random intercept. There was no improvement in model fit when adding a random slope of time (Δχ2 (4) = 2.95, p>.05), or a random slope of IPV, (Δχ2 (2) =0.32, p>.05). Although adding a random slope of within-person birth control use significantly improved the model (Δχ2 (2) = 16.42, p<.05), this model did not converge when adding a subsequent cross-level interaction involving within-person IPV. Therefore, all models were estimated with random intercepts and fixed effects, except when estimating cross-level interactions. Intraclass correlation coefficients were also examined; both the non-pregnancy vs AEP group (ICC = 0.43) and the nAEP vs AEP group (ICC=0.60) had reasonable between-person variability. Within and between-person main effects of physical IPV, birth control use, and adolescent alcohol use on AEP Table 2 displays the main effects using either non-pregnancy or nAEP as the reference group. As indicated, there were within-person (relationship-specific) effects. For every increase in presence of a specific physical IPV indicator within a relationship, compared to other relationships, odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy increased by 164%. Similarly, there was a 1.36 higher odds of AEP compared to nAEP, in relationships with increased IPV indicators compared to other relationships. There were no within-person significant effects for birth control use. In other words, using birth control consistently within a relationship, compared to other relationships, did not significantly increase the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy or nAEP outcomes. Table 2. Multi-level model parameters for odd ratios of AEP compared to reference variables non-pregnancy and nAEP AEP (vs non-pregnancy)	AEP (vs nAEP) Level 1			 Within-person Physical IPV	1.64** (1.27 – 2.12)	1.36* (1.08 – 1.72) Within-person Consistent Birth Control Use	0.50 (0.27 – 0.91)	1.71 (0.96 – 3.07) Within-person Length of Relationship	1.14* (1.04 – 1.25)	0.88* (0.80 – 0.97) Within-person Age at Start of Relationship	0.98 (0.90 – 1.05)	1.05 (0.97 – 1.13) Level 2			 Between-person Physical IPV	2.00** (1.68 – 2.38)	1.54** (1.32 – 1.81) Between-person Consistent Birth Control Use	0.34** (0.18 – 0.66)	0.38* (0.20 – 0.73) Between-person Length of Relationship	0.94 (0.83 – 1.05)	0.72** (0.64 – 0.80) Between-person Age at Start of Relationship	0.77** (0.69 – 0.86)	0.91 (0.80 – 1.04) Adolescent Infrequent Past Year Drinking (vs non/Abs.)	1.44 (0.94 – 2.18)	1.75* (1.13 – 2.70) Adolescent Moderate-Heavy Past Year Drinking (vs non/Abs.)	1.76* (1.17 – 2.66)	1.95** (1.25 – 3.05) Average IPV Experiences in Adolescent Relationships	1.68** (1.24 – 2.28)	1.23 (0.92 – 1.65) Adolescent Total Romantic/Sexual Partners	1.33** (1.11 – 1.58)	1.16 (0.95 – 1.40) Child Abuse History	1.34 (0.94 – 1.94)	1.33 (0.91 – 1.95) African American (vs White)	1.35 (0.79 – 2.32)	0.59 (0.35 – 0.98) Latino/a (vs White)	0.81 (0.46 – 1.41)	0.63 (0.36 – 1.09) Other Race (vs White)	1.01 (0.43 – 2.34)	1.13 (0.47 – 2.71) Age at WII	1.22* (1.04 – 1.43)	0.99 (0.85 – 1.15) Open in a separate window *p<.05; **p<.01 Note: AEP = “alcohol-exposed pregnancy”; IPV = “intimate partner violence”; Abs = “abstinence from alcohol There were also significant between-person effects distinguishing non-pregnancy from AEP and nAEP from AEP. For every additional physical IPV indicator experienced within the five-year span (averaged over all relationships), compared to other individuals, increased the overall odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy by 200%, and increased the overall odds of AEP compared to nAEP by 154%. Therefore, not only did IPV have within-relationship influence, but also distinguished AEP outcomes between individuals. In addition, individuals who used birth control more consistently over the 5-year period compared to other individuals decreased odds of AEP by 66% (compared to non-pregnancy) and 62% (compared to nAEP). Finally, alcohol use in adolescence increased odds of AEP. Individuals who reported past-year infrequent drinking in adolescence, compared to those who reported abstention or no past year drinking, increased odds of overall AEP compared to nAEP in adulthood by 175%. Those who reported heavy or moderate past-year drinking in adolescence, compared to those who reported abstention or no past year drinking, increased odds of AEP in adulthood by 176% (compared to no-pregnancy) or 195% (compared to nAEP). Therefore, adolescent drinking overall increased higher odds of AEP compared to either non-pregnancy or nAEP outcomes in adulthood. Interactions between IPV, adolescent alcohol use, and birth control use Between-person IPV moderated the effect of infrequent past-year adolescent alcohol use on the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy (OR = 1.49, p<.05, (95% CI (1.09 – 2.05)) and AEP compared to nAEP, (OR = 1.63, p<.05, 95% CI (1.21 – 2.19)). As seen in Figure 1a–b, the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy (1a) or nAEP (1b) were generally low. However, experiencing higher levels of physical IPV substantially increased the effect of infrequent adolescent drinking on the odds of AEP. For example, when examining the odds of AEP compared to nAEP (Figure 1b) the odds of AEP for an infrequent adolescent drinker who experienced no IPV from any romantic relationship in the past five years was 0.15. The odds of AEP for an infrequent adolescent drinker who experienced high IPV (e.g., 3 unique physical IPV indicators averaged across all romantic relationships in the past five years) was 1.03. Comparatively, the odds of AEP for moderate to heavy adolescent drinkers was 0.29 to 0.55 for those who experienced no or high IPV respectively. In other words, higher levels of average physical IPV over the five-year period significantly increased the odds of AEP for infrequent adolescent drinkers, compared to non-drinkers, however, IPV experience did not significantly increase the odds of AEP for moderate-heavy adolescent drinkers, compared to non-drinkers. There were no other significant interactions of IPV on either adolescent alcohol use or birth control use (see Supplemental Table 1a–b). An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is nihms-1008931-f0001.jpg Figure 1A-B. Level 2 IPV × adolescent past year drinking frequency interaction predicting odds of AEP vs non-pregnancy (A) and AEP vs nAEP (B) Note: IPV levels indicate average items endorsed over all relationships in past 5 years. Range of IPV is from 0 (no items) to 3 (3 items). Post Hoc Tests Alcohol use was assessed at adolescence (WII) to ensure directionality. Although alcohol use was also assessed at WIII, there was no alcohol use information that accompanied the timeline of relationships or pregnancies beyond the measure of AEP. However, given that alcohol use will most likely change over the five years between WII and WIII (e.g., a trend towards increasing in later adolescence/young adulthood; Chassin et al., 2004), we also ran models using the WIII alcohol variable. As with the main models, there were two dummy codes reflecting three categories (no past-year use, infrequent past year use, and moderate – to – high past year use). As WIII abstainers had been excluded from the study sample, the young adult no past-year use category included only those who had reported any lifetime use, but no past year use. Supplemental Table 2 displays frequency tables for comparing adolescent and young adult drinking rates. Similarly, in adolescents and young adults, non-abstaining, non-past year drinkers and heavy drinkers had the lowest categories. Supplemental Table 3a–3b displays the WIII-alcohol use variable models. Similar to the WII alcohol-use model, individuals who reported moderate/heavy alcohol use at WIII had higher odds of (previously) reporting AEP compared to nAEP; compared to non-drinkers, those who reported moderate or heavy drinking had 353% higher odds of an AEP. However, there were no other significant associations between WIII alcohol use and AEP outcomes. In addition, compared to the WII-alcohol model, there were no within-person significant effects of IPV or birth control use on distinguishing AEP from nAEP. There were significant within-person effects distinguishing AEP from non-pregnancy, similar to the WII-alcohol use model. Between-person effects for IPV and birth control were similar to the WII-alcohol use model. There were also no significant interactions. Go to: Discussion The purpose of this study was to examine the role of physical IPV as a risk factor for AEP as a unique predictor and a potential moderator of the two main behaviors emphasized in preconceptional AEP prevention programs: alcohol use and birth control. We found that IPV was a strong influence on AEP both within specific relationships and between people. IPV had little moderating influence on AEP outcomes; the one significant interaction highlights the contexts in which IPV may strengthen the history of (adolescent) alcohol use on later AEP. Intimate partner violence as a main effect As hypothesized, IPV related to higher odds of AEP, alongside higher alcohol use and lower birth control use. Individuals experiencing higher physical IPV within the 5–year period, compared to individuals who experienced less physical IPV, had higher odds of reporting any AEP outcome. This is consistent with studies comparing pregnant women who do or do not abstain from alcohol use (e.g., Kitsantas et al., 2015; McDonald et al., 2014; Powers et al., 2013). Experiencing IPV also had a direct influence on AEP compared to non-pregnancy and nAEP as a within-person (within-relationship) effect. Given the variety of ways in which physical IPV related to AEP, multiple explanations are needed. The association between IPV and unintended pregnancy, typically via lower associated levels of birth control (Miller et al., 2010; Pallitto et al., 2005) could explain within-person effects of IPV. Physical IPV (as measured here), is often accompanied by other forms of IPV that can further facilitate pregnancy, such as sexual IPV or reproductive coercion (Katz et al., 2017; Tanha et al., 2010). Another contributing explanation, pertaining to the within-person effect of IPV on AEP versus nAEP, may be the continued or even new experiences of IPV during pregnancy. There are less reported instances of IPV during pregnancy compared to non-pregnancy (e.g., Silverman, et al., 2006), however relationships marked by IPV can continue into pregnancy (James et al., 2013), and such IPV tends to increase in severity during pregnancy (Brownridge, et al., 2011). Substance use can increase during this time (Martin et al., 2003), if used as a coping mechanism. Between-person IPV effects indicate additional third variable explanations for the association between physical IPV and AEP vs nAEP. Variables related to both AEP and IPV include anxiety (Alvik et al., 2006; Pico-Alfonso, et al., 2006) and illicit drug use (Anderson et al., 2012; Harrisson & Sidebottom, 2009). Third variable explanations may also include pervasive forms of IPV such as coercive control, psychological/emotional violence, or even substance use coercion itself (Rivera et al., 2015; Warshaw et al., 2014). These types of IPV result in negative health outcomes such as substance use or lower birth control that are as strong as, or stronger than physical IPV effects (e.g., Ansara & Hindin, 2010; Coker et al., 2002). Most research examining the relationship between IPV and AEP either do not classify IPV typology (Anderson et al., 2014), only assess physical IPV (Kisantas et al., 2015), or aggregate IPV forms (McDonald et al., 2014). Roberts et al., (2014) documented that, within women seeking services for pregnancy termination, psychological IPV did not predict AEP when controlling for physical IPV. However it is unknown if these results generalize to other pregnancy/preconceptual situations. Intimate partner violence as a moderator Contrary to hypotheses, IPV was not a prominent moderator for alcohol use or birth control. Infrequent drinking in adolescence, compared to abstinence / no past year drinking, related to increased odds of AEP in young adulthood for those experiencing more IPV. This interaction highlights the way that IPV, or related third-variable contexts, can increase AEP vulnerability for women with a history of lower-level adolescent drinking. The strong association between earlier high drinking trajectories and alcohol use disorders (Deutsch et al., 2017, Hingson et al., 2006) may explain the lack of interaction between IPV and higher levels of adolescent drinking. For heavier adolescent drinkers, alcohol cessation during pregnancy may be more difficult regardless of external environment (e.g., IPV experience). However, IPV contexts may potentially reinforce drinking for individuals with a history of lower level alcohol use; individuals who otherwise may be more likely to stop drinking during pregnancy (Anderson et al., 2014; Okeefe et al., 2015). Birth control effects were not strengthened by IPV. We expected that there might be an interaction due to the strong relationship between IPV and birth control use (Tanaha et al., 2010) and IPV and unintended pregnancy (Miller et al., 2010). It is possible that other IPV forms more related to birth control use (e.g., coercive control) would strengthen birth control use effects. Alternatively, interactions between IPV and birth control use may be more relevant for unintended pregnancy, compared to AEP outcomes. Given the strong relationship between unintended pregnancy and AEP (e.g., McDonald et al., 2014), it may be beneficial to examine a mediating relationship between IPV/birth control, unintended pregnancy, and AEP. Intimate Partner Violence as an indicator of AEP risk for intervention programs The current findings support the notion that IPV, and other (third-variable) predictors that may relate to both AEP and substance use, may warrant special attention in AEP prevention curricula, as IPV related to declines in both outcomes preferred over AEP: non-pregnancy and nAEP. Most preconceptual short-term AEP interventions demonstrate improvement in birth control use (e.g., Hanson et al., 2017; Ingersoll et al., 2013, 2018, Wilton et al., 2013), indicating AEP prevention through these programs is mostly due to non-pregnancy outcomes. Variables contributing to maintenance of alcohol use, or contexts in which substance use and low birth control use are part of a larger system of lack of control or autonomy, might need emphasis outside of the personal feedback, motivational interview, or self-guided behavioral change formats, particularly for women who become pregnant. Strengths and Limitations The longitudinal, prospective data is a strength of the study, allowing us to examine change within individuals (between relationships). We also compared AEP to both favorable outcomes for preconceptual AEP prevention programs: non-pregnancy and nAEP. Prior studies typically only compare AEP and nAEP (pregnancy samples; Anderson et al., 2012; Frankenberger et al., 2015; Skagerstrom et al., 2013). A main limitation is the lack of other important within-relationship variables, particularly alcohol use. Time between adolescent alcohol use and each relationship was up to five years (average time difference between WII age and mean age at relationship start [across all relationships] was 2.74 (SD = 1.67), average time difference between WII age and mean age at due date [across all pregnancies] was 3.42 (SD = 1.82)4. Although Add Health includes both WII and WIII past year alcohol use, we used WII to ensure directionality. Another potential issue was the sample age, as women who drink while pregnant tend to skew older (e.g., Meschke et al., 2013) than the youngest sample participants. It is also possible that participants did not recognize their alcohol consumption during pregnancy. Retrospective reports for alcohol use are potentially less valid than prospective reports, although AEP may be more under-reported within prospective studies (Alvik et al., 2006). Finally, we only examined physical IPV. Including other types of IPV (e.g., psychological, emotional, coercive control) could have produced different results. Implications and Future Directions It should be noted that longer-term, case-management style AEP interventions, in which participants connect to a variety of services, improve both birth control use and alcohol use behavior (e.g., Grant et al., 2005; Rasmussen et al., 2012). There is also a personal goal component, but these goals are more multidimensional (e.g., “personal skills management”). However, these programs may not be pragmatic in highly impoverished, resource-poor areas; adding emphasis on contextual components to brief, scalable AEP prevention programs may be more feasible. AEP risk involves more than high alcohol use and low birth control use. Highly complex biological and environmental etiologies for alcohol use and addiction may necessitate longer-term comprehensive care for interventions targeting reduction or abstinence. Such comprehensive care may also be needed for participants who have not only experienced IPV or trauma, but also for participants who live in resource-scarce areas or in areas with limited alternatives for social support (e.g., highly rural or isolated areas). Although current interventions have substantially reduced AEP, consideration of mental health and maladaptive environments as barriers for behavioral change are critical for developing new or improved programs. Go to: Supplementary Material Supp TableS1 Click here to view.(23K, docx) Supp TableS2 Click here to view.(16K, docx) Supp TableS3 Click here to view.(19K, docx) Go to: Acknowledgements: Funding for this study was provided by P20 GM121341–01. This research uses data from Add Health, a program project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris and designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for assistance in the original design. Information on how to obtain the Add Health data files is available on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth). No direct support was received from grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis. Go to: Footnotes 1This variable was a composite of psychological (threatening) and physical (pushing, shoving, throwing something that can hurt) items, which we included as a physical item. 2An additional category splitting apart moderate and heavy drinkers (e.g., drinking at least three days a week) was initially included in the model. However, due to similarly small cell sizes of this category (n=78, 2.65%) the moderate and high categories were combined. Estimations that include both the non-past year drinking and heavy drinking categories are available upon request. 3This includes individuals who reported five total relationships or more than five relationships 4A small percentage of individuals reported that their first relationship in the past five years started earlier than their reported age at WII (n=37). A small number of individuals also reported that their first pregnancy with their first partner from the past five years was prior to their age at WII (n=38). 5For correlation purposes, we used a continuous drinking frequency variable. However, for the dummy variables, 44.68% of participants reported total abstention or no past year drinking, 35.31% reported infrequent drinking, and 20% reported moderate to heavy drinking.

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
{'Relations': [{'VariableOneName': 'IPV', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Adolescent alcohol use', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Between-person birth control use', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'IPV', 'VariableTwoName': 'Contraceptive use', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Birth control within a relationship', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Consistent birth control use over a 5-year period or more', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'IPV', 'VariableTwoName': 'Birth control', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]}
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
{'Relations': [{'VariableOneName': 'Cognitive distraction', 'VariableTwoName': 'Rumination', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'Sadness', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Rumination', 'VariableTwoName': 'Sadness', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSA withdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Rumination Induction', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Induced distraction', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'MDD', 'VariableTwoName': 'Cardiovascular disease', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]}
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. Correlations are also observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma, all of which impact substance use patterns and disparities within these communities. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
{'Relations': [{'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance-related mortality', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Alcohol-related deaths', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Chronic liver disease', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Drug-related issues', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance use initiation', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance use rates', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Living on reservations', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Dropped out of school', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adults who drink', 'VariableTwoName': 'Heavy, episodic drinking patterns', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance availability', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Trauma exposure', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Family and peer networks', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Historical trauma', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]}
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

Abstract Background: Pre-conceptual prevention programs geared towards reducing alcohol-exposed pregnancy (AEP) typically emphasize behavioral change of alcohol use and birth control exclusively, but rarely consider other important AEP predictors that may affect behavioral change. Intimate partner violence (IPV) substantially relates to AEP and to AEP predictors, however, few studies have tested if IPV is a unique indicator of prospective AEP risk, as both a main effect and a contextual influence on alcohol use or birth control. Methods: Using Waves II and III of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health), multilevel logistic regression models were estimated, in which IPV and birth control (both within-person and between-person) and adolescent alcohol use (between-person only) were examined as unique predictors of AEP compared to both non-pregnancy and non-AEP outcomes over up-to-5 sexual relationships. Interactions between within-person and between-person IPV, and birth control or alcohol use were also tested. Results: Within-person and between-person IPV significantly related to higher odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy and non-AEP. Adolescent alcohol use had similarly increased odds for AEP when compared to non-pregnancy or non-AEP outcomes. Only between-person birth control use related to higher odds for AEP compared to non-pregnancy and non-AEP. Between-person IPV also moderated adolescent alcohol use on odds of AEP, such that infrequent adolescent drinkers had higher odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy or non-AEP if they experienced IPV over their relationships. Conclusions: IPV is a substantial predictor for AEP as both a direct influence within relationships (within-person) and between individuals (between-person). Intervention and prevention programs focused on reducing AEP may benefit from including IPV-specific curricula. Approximately 10% of women in the United States consume alcohol while pregnant (Popova et al., 2017). Consequently, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder is one of the most common birth defects in the U.S., with rates ranging from 0.1 per 1000 to 100 per 1000 births, depending upon measurement (May et al., 2009; May et al., 2018). Although there is considerable attention and effort devoted to alcohol use cessation in pregnancy (Chang, 2009; Mengel et al., 2006; Nilsen, 2009), a large proportion of AEP involves drinking prior to learning of pregnancy status (McCormack et al., 2017). Thus, many prevention programs focus on reducing AEP prior to pregnancy through decreasing alcohol use and increasing pregnancy preventative measures (e.g., Floyd et al., 1999). These programs demonstrate moderate success, however, they often fail to address overarching contexts that can facilitate and maintain these behaviors, which may make behaviors harder to change. Intimate partner violence (IPV) is a particularly important risk factor for AEP, as well as a risk factor for alcohol and birth control use. The current study examines the link between IPV and AEP from a prospective, preconceptual lens, while controlling for other preconceptual AEP risk behaviors, testing the potential importance of including IPV as an AEP risk factor to address in preconceptual AEP prevention programs. Go to: Links between IPV and AEP IPV strongly associates with AEP (Anderson et al., 2014; Kitsantas et al., 2015; Li et al., 2012; Skagerstrom et al., 2011). A main reason for this may be that IPV victimization is both a precedent of alcohol use (Capaldi et al., 2012; Foran & O’Leary, 2008) and an antecedent (Devries et al., 2014; Derrik & Testa, 2017; Simmons et al., 2015). IPV also relates to lower levels of contraceptive use (Bergman & Stockman, 2015; Deutsch, in press; Maxwell et al., 2015). Consequently, unintended pregnancy, another predictor of AEP (McDonald et al., 2014), is also associated with IPV (Miller et al., 2010; Pallitto et al., v 2005). Underlying mechanisms for the association between IPV and AEP are unclear. Most research examining this association is descriptive. However, associations between IPV and alcohol use can be explained by broader relationship conflict (e.g., Collibee & Furman, 2018; Eckhard et al., 2015; Leonard & Quigley, 1999) and personal coping strategies (e.g., Schumacher et al., 2008; Ivory & Kambouropoulos, 2012; Leonard & Eiden, 2007). Given that IPV can continue during pregnancy, or that pregnancy can contribute to new instances of IPV (James et al., 2013), pregnancy may not be a sufficient deterrent for reducing alcohol use, if underlying IPV-related shared variables strongly maintain levels of alcohol use. Additionally, substance use coercion is a form of IPV itself (Rivera et al., 2015; Warshaw et al., 2014). Thus, alcohol misuse, even within pregnancy, can be maintained in part by their IPV perpetrating partners. There are also underlying mechanisms explaining the association between IPV and lower birth control use. IPV-related lower birth control is associated with coercive control motives within a relationship (Tanha et al., 2010). Reproductive coercion, in which individuals gain power over their partners by removing their partners’ reproductive agency, relates to other forms of IPV (Katz et al., 2017). Pregnancy coercion, another form of IPV reproductive control, can also explain higher rates of unintended pregnancies in IPV-marked relationships (Miller et al., 2010). Although some research indicates that AEP is more prominent in older women (e.g., Harrison & Sidebottom, 2009), pathways between alcohol use, IPV, and low birth control use start in adolescence, (Roberts et al., 2005; Silverman et al., 2001; Teitelman et al., 2008). Therefore, the association between these variables has a strong developmental context and may require addressing underlying long-standing cognitive schemas or behavioral habits. Taken together, IPV, alcohol use, low levels of contraception, unintended pregnancy, and AEP may form long-term patterns of association with one another. However, more research is required to understand the genuine ways in which IPV functions as a potential AEP risk factor. It may be important to see if IPV strengthens other AEP risk factors, given the cyclic association between risk variables. In addition, although most studies examining AEP predictors only compare AEP to women who do not drink during pregnancy (e.g., Anderson et al., 2014; Kisantas et al., 2015) this does not accurately inform preconceptual prevention programs, which emphasize both reducing alcohol use and overall pregnancy. Prospective research that can compare AEP predictors to outcomes that are more favorable than AEP (non-pregnancy and non-drinking pregnancy) may provide insight for prevention programs. Go to: Pre-conceptual AEP prevention programs The most common format of AEP prevention programs are brief interventions emphasizing motivated behavioral change (e.g., Ceperich & Ingersoll, 2011 Floyd et al., 2007; Ingersoll et al., 2013). Interventions can include motivational interview counseling, assessment feedback, and contraception counseling (Velasquez et al., 2013), although there are also self-guided formats (e.g., Tenkku et al., 2011). Reduced drinking and increased birth control use is guided by a process of self-evaluation and developing plans of change for levels of alcohol use and birth control use (Floyd et al., 2007; Velasquez et al., 2010). The brevity of these programs makes it scalable and easy to implement without requiring a large number of resources, which can be crucial in resource-poor, in-need populations. Success of preconceptual AEP prevention programs is typically defined as either post-program decrease in alcohol use and/or an increase in birth control. These programs do achieve both of these aims (Floyd et al., 2007; Hutton et al., 2014), but have more success in increasing birth control than reducing alcohol use (e.g., Farrell-Caranhan, et al., 2013; Hanson et al., 2017; Wilton, et al., 2013). In other words, programs are more successful at reducing the number of overall potential pregnancies potentially exposed to alcohol, compared to reducing the amount of alcohol consumed that may affect the remaining pregnancies. One potential reason for this may be that these programs tend to focus exclusively on individual-level behavioral change, and do not necessarily account for environments that may provide substantial barriers for change. For example, women in relationships marked by IPV may have a more difficult time either trying to reduce alcohol misuse (e.g., out of a higher need for immediate coping) or trying to obtain birth control (out of fear of partner reactions or even due to active resistance from the partner; de Bocanegra et al., 2010). Go to: Current Study The purpose of this study is to explore ways in which IPV may serve as a risk factor for AEP. Although IPV is a known predictor of AEP, it will be important to know if IPV has contextual, moderating influences on other AEP predictors, particularly those emphasized as risk factors in preconceptual prevention programs. As the goals of preconceptual AEP prevention programs are to 1) reduce the number of pregnancies by increasing contraceptive use, and 2) reduce AEP by reducing alcohol use within pregnancies, we compared three outcomes: AEP, non-pregnancy, and no-alcohol-exposed pregnancy (nAEP.) Specifically, we wanted to know if IPV was a unique risk factor for AEP, controlling for birth control use and alcohol use. Utilizing a multi-level, longitudinal design, we were able to examine if IPV was a unique risk factor a) within people, over relationships, and b) between individuals. We hypothesized that within relationships, IPV would relate to higher odds of AEP. In addition, those who reported experiencing higher levels of IPV averaged over all relationships would have higher odds of AEP compared to those who reported lower or no levels of IPV averaged over all relationships. We also hypothesized the effects of birth control use and alcohol use would be similar to prior research. Higher alcohol use would relate to higher odds of AEP, and that higher birth control use would relate to lower odds of AEP (although perhaps only when comparing AEP to non-pregnancy). We also examined IPV as a potential moderating context. As IPV relates to both higher alcohol use and lower birth control, it is possible that IPV strengthens alcohol use and birth control effects on the odds of AEP. Therefore, we hypothesized that IPV would strengthen the positive effect that alcohol use has on the odds of AEP, and would strengthen the negative effect that birth control use has on the odds of AEP. We included controls of childhood abuse and adolescent intimate partner violence, as well as time-varying contextual variables of the age at the start of relationship and relationship duration. Childhood abuse was included as it is a predictor of AEP (Frankenberger et al., 2015; Whitfield et al., 2003), intimate partner violence victimization (Renner & Slack, 2006) and alcohol use and abuse in adolescence and adulthood (e.g., Dube et al., 2002; Shin et al., 2009). Adolescent intimate partner violence was also included due to relationships between adolescent and young adult re-victimization (Gomez, 2011). Go to: Method Participants Participants were from Wave 2 (WII) and 3 (WIII) of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health). A nationally-representative U.S. sample was first assessed at grades 7 – 12 in 1994–95 (WI), and then followed up in 1996 (WII), 2000–2001 (WIII) and 2004–2005 (Wave 4). Women who completed WII and WIII, reported more than one WIII romantic relationship, and reported alcohol onset by WIII were included in the present analyses. The final sample included 3460 observations for 2097 participants. Measures Adult (WIII) Pregnancy status. Pregnancy status was a three-category variable indicating non-pregnancy (0) nAEP (1) or AEP pregnancy (2) within each romantic relationship. Participants were asked detailed questions about each completed/current pregnancy, and each pregnancy was linked to a reported romantic/sexual relationship. AEP was specifically assessed by the question “During this pregnancy, how often did you drink alcoholic beverages?” for each pregnancy. Options ranged from 0 (never) to 4 (almost every day). This was collapsed to a binary AEP/non-AEP variable. Multiple pregnancies within a single relationship were aggregated. The non-AEP pregnancy code indicated no alcohol exposure for all reported pregnancies within that romantic/sexual relationship. An AEP pregnancy code indicated at least 1 alcohol-exposed pregnancy for all pregnancies within the specific romantic/sexual relationship. Adult (WIII) Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) Victimization. Respondents were asked about having had experienced physical IPV by every sexual partner they reported in WIII. This measure was adapted from the revised Conflicts and Tactics Scale (CTS2; Straus et al., 1996). Physical IPV was measured by asking how often one’s partner a) “has threatened you with violence, pushed or shoved you, or thrown something at you that could hurt”1, b) “has slapped, hit, or kicked you” or if “you had an injury such as a sprain, bruise, or cut because of a fight with (partner). Items were initially measured using a 7 point scale, from 0 (never) to 6 (more than 20 times), with an extra item for indicating that “this hasn’t happened in the past year, but did happen before then”. Items were re-coded with a binary absence/presence for the prevalence of each indicator of physical IPV (see Straus, 2004). The final score was the sum score for the three items. Adult (WIII) Consistent Birth Control Use: Participants were asked about their use of condoms and birth control for every sexual relationship that they reported in WIII. For every partner, individuals were asked if they had (vaginal) sex on one or more than one occasion. Those who reported having had sex only one time with each specific partner were asked if they had used any birth control, and for those that reported use, what birth control was used (respondents could choose up to three methods). Those who reported having had sex more than one time with each specific partner were asked if they used any birth control/what types of birth control for the first and most recent time they had sex. Individuals were coded as having had consistent birth control use if they reported using any effective birth control (condom, birth control pills, vaginal sponge, foam/jelly, diaphragm, IUD, Norplant, ring, Depo Provera or contraceptive film) for their only or both first and most recent times having had sex. Although the different birth control methods within the consistent birth control group may have varying levels of efficacy/failure (e.g., Kost et al., 2008), we chose to group these together due to the small sample sizes of methods other than condom use and hormonal birth control. Those who reported no birth control use at any time, either first or most recent times or those who reported using only withdrawal or the rhythm method for their BC were coded as having inconsistent birth control use. Adolescent (WII) IPV victimization was derived from a measure assessing WII reports of up to six sexual/romantic partners (up to three romantic and three non-romantic) they had in the past year (since the last interview at WI). Similar to the WIII measure, participants were asked if their partner(s) had ever threatened them with violence, pushed or shoved the participant or thrown something at the participant that could hurt them. However, these were assessed as binary, not frequency variables. These items were summed for each partner and then averaged across partners. Adolescent (WII) Alcohol Use Frequency. Alcohol use in adolescence was assessed via a past-year frequency variable at WII. This score was initially re-coded with dummy variables to account for abstainers, however, non-abstaining individuals who reported no past year use were also included in this category, as this was a small proportion of individuals (n = 77, 2.61%), and such models performed poorly when examining interactions, most likely due to small cell sizes. Therefore, there were two dummy codes reflecting three categories: abstainers/non-abstaining non-users, infrequent drinkers (those who reported drinking once a month or less), and moderate-to-high drinkers, who reported drinking at least two times a month.2 Control Variables. Two variables were included to contextualize the WIII time-varying romantic relationships. Length of each sexual relationship was calculated by subtracting the reported start and end dates (past relationship) or by subtracting the start and the interview date (current relationship). This variable was re-coded into an eight-point scale, ranging from 1 day (0) to more than 4 years (7). Age at start of each relationship was assessed by subtracting participants’ birth date from the reported start date of the relationship. Total number of adolescent (WII) relationships was added as a control for the WII physical violence victimization variable, to distinguish meaning between those who reported either no physically violent relationships or no relationships (both of which would result in scores of 0). This was assessed by counting the number of romantic relationship partners endorsed in the WII relationship measure. Childhood abuse was conceptualized as mistreatment by parents or adult caregivers prior to 6th grade (measured in WIII). Participants reported how often adults (parents or other adult caregivers) had slapped, hit, or kicked them, and how often they had “touched you in a sexual way, forced you to touch him or her in a sexual way, or forced you to have sexual relations”. Reporting physical or sexual abuse was coded with a “1” while reporting no physical or sexual abuse was coded with a “0”. Finally, age at WII was included to contextualize the adolescent alcohol use (e.g., contextualize differences between a 13-year-old drinker versus an 18-year-old drinker). Go to: Analytic Plan A generalized multi-level model nesting relationship within person-level effects compared pregnancy outcomes (AEP versus nAEP or non-pregnancy). This included four relationship-varying effects: IPV, consistent birth control use, age at the start of relationship, and length of relationship. Adolescent alcohol use frequency, IPV/relationship ratio, and the number of romantic partners, along with child abuse and race were considered non-relationship varying (between-person) variables. A main model was first estimated, as well as four models that examined two-way interactions between IPV and either birth control use, or adolescent alcohol use. Two IPV × adolescent alcohol use interactions were estimated: a cross-level within-person IPV × between-person alcohol use interaction, and a between-person IPV × between-person alcohol use interaction. For interactions between IPV and birth control use, there were four possibilities to explore: two cross-level interactions (a within-person IPV × between-person birth control interaction, and a within-person birth control and between-person IPV interaction), and two single-level interactions (within-person or between person only interactions). Only the first five relationships were included in this model due to low numbers in both the number of reported relationships after 5, as well as the number of reported relationships after 5 that also included pregnancies. Although individuals reported up to 48 relationships, 81.87% participants reported 1 – 5 relationships and 91.06% of relationships with pregnancy outcomes were reported for relationships 1 – 5. Person-means centering was used to assess the direct effects of within-person and between-person effects (Curran & Bauer, 2011) for IPV, age at the start of relationship, and length of relationship. A grand-means centered approach was used for the birth control variable (person-means centering is not advisable for binary variables). All models were estimated using Mplus TWOLEVEL COMPLEX function, which accounts for the stratified sampling and complex survey weights, and a robust maximum likelihood estimator to account for missingness of data. Go to: Results Total number of relationships reported were: 2 relationships (26.51%), 3 relationships (21.16%), 4 relationships (16.27%) and 5+ relationships (36.06%3). Table 1 presents the correlations and means/frequencies for all variables. Table 1. Correlations and means/frequencies of all variables across all relationships 1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11	12 1. Total Pregnancies	-											 2. Total AEP (for pregnancies only)	0.20**	-										 3. Average IPV Victimization Across Relationships	0.27**	0.13*	-									 4. Average Consistent BC Use Across Relationships	−0.29**	−0.11**	−0.17**	-								 5. Average Age at Start of relationship(s)	−0.08**	0.02	−0.04*	0.08**	-							 6. Average Length of Relationship(s)	0.24**	−0.10**	0.14**	−0.14**	−0.16**	-						 7. Adolescent Frequency of Drinking	0.11**	0.16**	0.10**	−0.04*	−0.01	0.06**	-					 8. Adolescent Physical IPV	0.15**	0.05	0.16**	−0.06**	−0.01	0.08**	0.10**	-				 9. Adolescent Total Sexual/Romantic Partners	0.05**	0.01	0.06**	−0.01	−0.15	0.02	0.18**	0.09**	-			 10. Child Abuse	0.05**	0.11**	0.12**	−0.08**	−0.03	−0.01	0.04	0.01	0.03	-		 11. Race	0.08**	0.04	0.03	−0.10**	0.06**	0.04*	−.07**	0.01-	0.04**	0.11**	-	 12. Age	0.14**	0.02	0.05**	−0.01	0.51**	0.19**	.20**	0.11**	0.14**	0.01	0.08**	-  Mean (SD) [Range] / Frequency												 0: 63.22% 1: 27.55% 2: 8.32% 3 – 9: 0.91%	0: 84.97 % 1: 13.20 % 2 – 3: 1.83%	0.62 (1.06) [0 – 6]	0.61 (0.37) [0 – 1]	19.06 (1.76) [15 – 26]	3.42 (1.64) [0 – 7]	1.48 (1.43)5	0.11 (0.39) [0 – 3]	0.91 (0.95) [0 – 5]	0.32 (0.47)	W: 56.59% B: 20.56% L: 15.01% A:6.26% AIAN:1.58%	16.08 (1.56) Open in a separate window *p<.05; **p<.01 Multilevel Models Multilevel models were first tested to see if random slopes were necessary in addition to a random intercept. There was no improvement in model fit when adding a random slope of time (Δχ2 (4) = 2.95, p>.05), or a random slope of IPV, (Δχ2 (2) =0.32, p>.05). Although adding a random slope of within-person birth control use significantly improved the model (Δχ2 (2) = 16.42, p<.05), this model did not converge when adding a subsequent cross-level interaction involving within-person IPV. Therefore, all models were estimated with random intercepts and fixed effects, except when estimating cross-level interactions. Intraclass correlation coefficients were also examined; both the non-pregnancy vs AEP group (ICC = 0.43) and the nAEP vs AEP group (ICC=0.60) had reasonable between-person variability. Within and between-person main effects of physical IPV, birth control use, and adolescent alcohol use on AEP Table 2 displays the main effects using either non-pregnancy or nAEP as the reference group. As indicated, there were within-person (relationship-specific) effects. For every increase in presence of a specific physical IPV indicator within a relationship, compared to other relationships, odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy increased by 164%. Similarly, there was a 1.36 higher odds of AEP compared to nAEP, in relationships with increased IPV indicators compared to other relationships. There were no within-person significant effects for birth control use. In other words, using birth control consistently within a relationship, compared to other relationships, did not significantly increase the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy or nAEP outcomes. Table 2. Multi-level model parameters for odd ratios of AEP compared to reference variables non-pregnancy and nAEP AEP (vs non-pregnancy)	AEP (vs nAEP) Level 1			 Within-person Physical IPV	1.64** (1.27 – 2.12)	1.36* (1.08 – 1.72) Within-person Consistent Birth Control Use	0.50 (0.27 – 0.91)	1.71 (0.96 – 3.07) Within-person Length of Relationship	1.14* (1.04 – 1.25)	0.88* (0.80 – 0.97) Within-person Age at Start of Relationship	0.98 (0.90 – 1.05)	1.05 (0.97 – 1.13) Level 2			 Between-person Physical IPV	2.00** (1.68 – 2.38)	1.54** (1.32 – 1.81) Between-person Consistent Birth Control Use	0.34** (0.18 – 0.66)	0.38* (0.20 – 0.73) Between-person Length of Relationship	0.94 (0.83 – 1.05)	0.72** (0.64 – 0.80) Between-person Age at Start of Relationship	0.77** (0.69 – 0.86)	0.91 (0.80 – 1.04) Adolescent Infrequent Past Year Drinking (vs non/Abs.)	1.44 (0.94 – 2.18)	1.75* (1.13 – 2.70) Adolescent Moderate-Heavy Past Year Drinking (vs non/Abs.)	1.76* (1.17 – 2.66)	1.95** (1.25 – 3.05) Average IPV Experiences in Adolescent Relationships	1.68** (1.24 – 2.28)	1.23 (0.92 – 1.65) Adolescent Total Romantic/Sexual Partners	1.33** (1.11 – 1.58)	1.16 (0.95 – 1.40) Child Abuse History	1.34 (0.94 – 1.94)	1.33 (0.91 – 1.95) African American (vs White)	1.35 (0.79 – 2.32)	0.59 (0.35 – 0.98) Latino/a (vs White)	0.81 (0.46 – 1.41)	0.63 (0.36 – 1.09) Other Race (vs White)	1.01 (0.43 – 2.34)	1.13 (0.47 – 2.71) Age at WII	1.22* (1.04 – 1.43)	0.99 (0.85 – 1.15) Open in a separate window *p<.05; **p<.01 Note: AEP = “alcohol-exposed pregnancy”; IPV = “intimate partner violence”; Abs = “abstinence from alcohol There were also significant between-person effects distinguishing non-pregnancy from AEP and nAEP from AEP. For every additional physical IPV indicator experienced within the five-year span (averaged over all relationships), compared to other individuals, increased the overall odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy by 200%, and increased the overall odds of AEP compared to nAEP by 154%. Therefore, not only did IPV have within-relationship influence, but also distinguished AEP outcomes between individuals. In addition, individuals who used birth control more consistently over the 5-year period compared to other individuals decreased odds of AEP by 66% (compared to non-pregnancy) and 62% (compared to nAEP). Finally, alcohol use in adolescence increased odds of AEP. Individuals who reported past-year infrequent drinking in adolescence, compared to those who reported abstention or no past year drinking, increased odds of overall AEP compared to nAEP in adulthood by 175%. Those who reported heavy or moderate past-year drinking in adolescence, compared to those who reported abstention or no past year drinking, increased odds of AEP in adulthood by 176% (compared to no-pregnancy) or 195% (compared to nAEP). Therefore, adolescent drinking overall increased higher odds of AEP compared to either non-pregnancy or nAEP outcomes in adulthood. Interactions between IPV, adolescent alcohol use, and birth control use Between-person IPV moderated the effect of infrequent past-year adolescent alcohol use on the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy (OR = 1.49, p<.05, (95% CI (1.09 – 2.05)) and AEP compared to nAEP, (OR = 1.63, p<.05, 95% CI (1.21 – 2.19)). As seen in Figure 1a–b, the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy (1a) or nAEP (1b) were generally low. However, experiencing higher levels of physical IPV substantially increased the effect of infrequent adolescent drinking on the odds of AEP. For example, when examining the odds of AEP compared to nAEP (Figure 1b) the odds of AEP for an infrequent adolescent drinker who experienced no IPV from any romantic relationship in the past five years was 0.15. The odds of AEP for an infrequent adolescent drinker who experienced high IPV (e.g., 3 unique physical IPV indicators averaged across all romantic relationships in the past five years) was 1.03. Comparatively, the odds of AEP for moderate to heavy adolescent drinkers was 0.29 to 0.55 for those who experienced no or high IPV respectively. In other words, higher levels of average physical IPV over the five-year period significantly increased the odds of AEP for infrequent adolescent drinkers, compared to non-drinkers, however, IPV experience did not significantly increase the odds of AEP for moderate-heavy adolescent drinkers, compared to non-drinkers. There were no other significant interactions of IPV on either adolescent alcohol use or birth control use (see Supplemental Table 1a–b). An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is nihms-1008931-f0001.jpg Figure 1A-B. Level 2 IPV × adolescent past year drinking frequency interaction predicting odds of AEP vs non-pregnancy (A) and AEP vs nAEP (B) Note: IPV levels indicate average items endorsed over all relationships in past 5 years. Range of IPV is from 0 (no items) to 3 (3 items). Post Hoc Tests Alcohol use was assessed at adolescence (WII) to ensure directionality. Although alcohol use was also assessed at WIII, there was no alcohol use information that accompanied the timeline of relationships or pregnancies beyond the measure of AEP. However, given that alcohol use will most likely change over the five years between WII and WIII (e.g., a trend towards increasing in later adolescence/young adulthood; Chassin et al., 2004), we also ran models using the WIII alcohol variable. As with the main models, there were two dummy codes reflecting three categories (no past-year use, infrequent past year use, and moderate – to – high past year use). As WIII abstainers had been excluded from the study sample, the young adult no past-year use category included only those who had reported any lifetime use, but no past year use. Supplemental Table 2 displays frequency tables for comparing adolescent and young adult drinking rates. Similarly, in adolescents and young adults, non-abstaining, non-past year drinkers and heavy drinkers had the lowest categories. Supplemental Table 3a–3b displays the WIII-alcohol use variable models. Similar to the WII alcohol-use model, individuals who reported moderate/heavy alcohol use at WIII had higher odds of (previously) reporting AEP compared to nAEP; compared to non-drinkers, those who reported moderate or heavy drinking had 353% higher odds of an AEP. However, there were no other significant associations between WIII alcohol use and AEP outcomes. In addition, compared to the WII-alcohol model, there were no within-person significant effects of IPV or birth control use on distinguishing AEP from nAEP. There were significant within-person effects distinguishing AEP from non-pregnancy, similar to the WII-alcohol use model. Between-person effects for IPV and birth control were similar to the WII-alcohol use model. There were also no significant interactions. Go to: Discussion The purpose of this study was to examine the role of physical IPV as a risk factor for AEP as a unique predictor and a potential moderator of the two main behaviors emphasized in preconceptional AEP prevention programs: alcohol use and birth control. We found that IPV was a strong influence on AEP both within specific relationships and between people. IPV had little moderating influence on AEP outcomes; the one significant interaction highlights the contexts in which IPV may strengthen the history of (adolescent) alcohol use on later AEP. Intimate partner violence as a main effect As hypothesized, IPV related to higher odds of AEP, alongside higher alcohol use and lower birth control use. Individuals experiencing higher physical IPV within the 5–year period, compared to individuals who experienced less physical IPV, had higher odds of reporting any AEP outcome. This is consistent with studies comparing pregnant women who do or do not abstain from alcohol use (e.g., Kitsantas et al., 2015; McDonald et al., 2014; Powers et al., 2013). Experiencing IPV also had a direct influence on AEP compared to non-pregnancy and nAEP as a within-person (within-relationship) effect. Given the variety of ways in which physical IPV related to AEP, multiple explanations are needed. The association between IPV and unintended pregnancy, typically via lower associated levels of birth control (Miller et al., 2010; Pallitto et al., 2005) could explain within-person effects of IPV. Physical IPV (as measured here), is often accompanied by other forms of IPV that can further facilitate pregnancy, such as sexual IPV or reproductive coercion (Katz et al., 2017; Tanha et al., 2010). Another contributing explanation, pertaining to the within-person effect of IPV on AEP versus nAEP, may be the continued or even new experiences of IPV during pregnancy. There are less reported instances of IPV during pregnancy compared to non-pregnancy (e.g., Silverman, et al., 2006), however relationships marked by IPV can continue into pregnancy (James et al., 2013), and such IPV tends to increase in severity during pregnancy (Brownridge, et al., 2011). Substance use can increase during this time (Martin et al., 2003), if used as a coping mechanism. Between-person IPV effects indicate additional third variable explanations for the association between physical IPV and AEP vs nAEP. Variables related to both AEP and IPV include anxiety (Alvik et al., 2006; Pico-Alfonso, et al., 2006) and illicit drug use (Anderson et al., 2012; Harrisson & Sidebottom, 2009). Third variable explanations may also include pervasive forms of IPV such as coercive control, psychological/emotional violence, or even substance use coercion itself (Rivera et al., 2015; Warshaw et al., 2014). These types of IPV result in negative health outcomes such as substance use or lower birth control that are as strong as, or stronger than physical IPV effects (e.g., Ansara & Hindin, 2010; Coker et al., 2002). Most research examining the relationship between IPV and AEP either do not classify IPV typology (Anderson et al., 2014), only assess physical IPV (Kisantas et al., 2015), or aggregate IPV forms (McDonald et al., 2014). Roberts et al., (2014) documented that, within women seeking services for pregnancy termination, psychological IPV did not predict AEP when controlling for physical IPV. However it is unknown if these results generalize to other pregnancy/preconceptual situations. Intimate partner violence as a moderator Contrary to hypotheses, IPV was not a prominent moderator for alcohol use or birth control. Infrequent drinking in adolescence, compared to abstinence / no past year drinking, related to increased odds of AEP in young adulthood for those experiencing more IPV. This interaction highlights the way that IPV, or related third-variable contexts, can increase AEP vulnerability for women with a history of lower-level adolescent drinking. The strong association between earlier high drinking trajectories and alcohol use disorders (Deutsch et al., 2017, Hingson et al., 2006) may explain the lack of interaction between IPV and higher levels of adolescent drinking. For heavier adolescent drinkers, alcohol cessation during pregnancy may be more difficult regardless of external environment (e.g., IPV experience). However, IPV contexts may potentially reinforce drinking for individuals with a history of lower level alcohol use; individuals who otherwise may be more likely to stop drinking during pregnancy (Anderson et al., 2014; Okeefe et al., 2015). Birth control effects were not strengthened by IPV. We expected that there might be an interaction due to the strong relationship between IPV and birth control use (Tanaha et al., 2010) and IPV and unintended pregnancy (Miller et al., 2010). It is possible that other IPV forms more related to birth control use (e.g., coercive control) would strengthen birth control use effects. Alternatively, interactions between IPV and birth control use may be more relevant for unintended pregnancy, compared to AEP outcomes. Given the strong relationship between unintended pregnancy and AEP (e.g., McDonald et al., 2014), it may be beneficial to examine a mediating relationship between IPV/birth control, unintended pregnancy, and AEP. Intimate Partner Violence as an indicator of AEP risk for intervention programs The current findings support the notion that IPV, and other (third-variable) predictors that may relate to both AEP and substance use, may warrant special attention in AEP prevention curricula, as IPV related to declines in both outcomes preferred over AEP: non-pregnancy and nAEP. Most preconceptual short-term AEP interventions demonstrate improvement in birth control use (e.g., Hanson et al., 2017; Ingersoll et al., 2013, 2018, Wilton et al., 2013), indicating AEP prevention through these programs is mostly due to non-pregnancy outcomes. Variables contributing to maintenance of alcohol use, or contexts in which substance use and low birth control use are part of a larger system of lack of control or autonomy, might need emphasis outside of the personal feedback, motivational interview, or self-guided behavioral change formats, particularly for women who become pregnant. Strengths and Limitations The longitudinal, prospective data is a strength of the study, allowing us to examine change within individuals (between relationships). We also compared AEP to both favorable outcomes for preconceptual AEP prevention programs: non-pregnancy and nAEP. Prior studies typically only compare AEP and nAEP (pregnancy samples; Anderson et al., 2012; Frankenberger et al., 2015; Skagerstrom et al., 2013). A main limitation is the lack of other important within-relationship variables, particularly alcohol use. Time between adolescent alcohol use and each relationship was up to five years (average time difference between WII age and mean age at relationship start [across all relationships] was 2.74 (SD = 1.67), average time difference between WII age and mean age at due date [across all pregnancies] was 3.42 (SD = 1.82)4. Although Add Health includes both WII and WIII past year alcohol use, we used WII to ensure directionality. Another potential issue was the sample age, as women who drink while pregnant tend to skew older (e.g., Meschke et al., 2013) than the youngest sample participants. It is also possible that participants did not recognize their alcohol consumption during pregnancy. Retrospective reports for alcohol use are potentially less valid than prospective reports, although AEP may be more under-reported within prospective studies (Alvik et al., 2006). Finally, we only examined physical IPV. Including other types of IPV (e.g., psychological, emotional, coercive control) could have produced different results. Implications and Future Directions It should be noted that longer-term, case-management style AEP interventions, in which participants connect to a variety of services, improve both birth control use and alcohol use behavior (e.g., Grant et al., 2005; Rasmussen et al., 2012). There is also a personal goal component, but these goals are more multidimensional (e.g., “personal skills management”). However, these programs may not be pragmatic in highly impoverished, resource-poor areas; adding emphasis on contextual components to brief, scalable AEP prevention programs may be more feasible. AEP risk involves more than high alcohol use and low birth control use. Highly complex biological and environmental etiologies for alcohol use and addiction may necessitate longer-term comprehensive care for interventions targeting reduction or abstinence. Such comprehensive care may also be needed for participants who have not only experienced IPV or trauma, but also for participants who live in resource-scarce areas or in areas with limited alternatives for social support (e.g., highly rural or isolated areas). Although current interventions have substantially reduced AEP, consideration of mental health and maladaptive environments as barriers for behavioral change are critical for developing new or improved programs. Go to: Supplementary Material Supp TableS1 Click here to view.(23K, docx) Supp TableS2 Click here to view.(16K, docx) Supp TableS3 Click here to view.(19K, docx) Go to: Acknowledgements: Funding for this study was provided by P20 GM121341–01. This research uses data from Add Health, a program project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris and designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for assistance in the original design. Information on how to obtain the Add Health data files is available on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth). No direct support was received from grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis. Go to: Footnotes 1This variable was a composite of psychological (threatening) and physical (pushing, shoving, throwing something that can hurt) items, which we included as a physical item. 2An additional category splitting apart moderate and heavy drinkers (e.g., drinking at least three days a week) was initially included in the model. However, due to similarly small cell sizes of this category (n=78, 2.65%) the moderate and high categories were combined. Estimations that include both the non-past year drinking and heavy drinking categories are available upon request. 3This includes individuals who reported five total relationships or more than five relationships 4A small percentage of individuals reported that their first relationship in the past five years started earlier than their reported age at WII (n=37). A small number of individuals also reported that their first pregnancy with their first partner from the past five years was prior to their age at WII (n=38). 5For correlation purposes, we used a continuous drinking frequency variable. However, for the dummy variables, 44.68% of participants reported total abstention or no past year drinking, 35.31% reported infrequent drinking, and 20% reported moderate to heavy drinking.

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
{'Relations': [{'VariableOneName': 'IPV', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Adolescent alcohol use', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Between-person birth control use', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'IPV', 'VariableTwoName': 'Contraceptive use', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Birth control within a relationship', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Consistent birth control use over a 5-year period or more', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'IPV', 'VariableTwoName': 'Birth control', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]}
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
{'Relations': [{'VariableOneName': 'Cognitive distraction', 'VariableTwoName': 'Rumination', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'Sadness', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Rumination', 'VariableTwoName': 'Sadness', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSA withdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Rumination Induction', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Induced distraction', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'MDD', 'VariableTwoName': 'Cardiovascular disease', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]}
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. Correlations are also observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma, all of which impact substance use patterns and disparities within these communities. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
{'Relations': [{'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance-related mortality', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Alcohol-related deaths', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Chronic liver disease', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Drug-related issues', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance use initiation', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance use rates', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Living on reservations', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Dropped out of school', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adults who drink', 'VariableTwoName': 'Heavy, episodic drinking patterns', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance availability', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Trauma exposure', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Family and peer networks', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Historical trauma', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]}
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

Abstract Background: Pre-conceptual prevention programs geared towards reducing alcohol-exposed pregnancy (AEP) typically emphasize behavioral change of alcohol use and birth control exclusively, but rarely consider other important AEP predictors that may affect behavioral change. Intimate partner violence (IPV) substantially relates to AEP and to AEP predictors, however, few studies have tested if IPV is a unique indicator of prospective AEP risk, as both a main effect and a contextual influence on alcohol use or birth control. Methods: Using Waves II and III of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health), multilevel logistic regression models were estimated, in which IPV and birth control (both within-person and between-person) and adolescent alcohol use (between-person only) were examined as unique predictors of AEP compared to both non-pregnancy and non-AEP outcomes over up-to-5 sexual relationships. Interactions between within-person and between-person IPV, and birth control or alcohol use were also tested. Results: Within-person and between-person IPV significantly related to higher odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy and non-AEP. Adolescent alcohol use had similarly increased odds for AEP when compared to non-pregnancy or non-AEP outcomes. Only between-person birth control use related to higher odds for AEP compared to non-pregnancy and non-AEP. Between-person IPV also moderated adolescent alcohol use on odds of AEP, such that infrequent adolescent drinkers had higher odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy or non-AEP if they experienced IPV over their relationships. Conclusions: IPV is a substantial predictor for AEP as both a direct influence within relationships (within-person) and between individuals (between-person). Intervention and prevention programs focused on reducing AEP may benefit from including IPV-specific curricula. Approximately 10% of women in the United States consume alcohol while pregnant (Popova et al., 2017). Consequently, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder is one of the most common birth defects in the U.S., with rates ranging from 0.1 per 1000 to 100 per 1000 births, depending upon measurement (May et al., 2009; May et al., 2018). Although there is considerable attention and effort devoted to alcohol use cessation in pregnancy (Chang, 2009; Mengel et al., 2006; Nilsen, 2009), a large proportion of AEP involves drinking prior to learning of pregnancy status (McCormack et al., 2017). Thus, many prevention programs focus on reducing AEP prior to pregnancy through decreasing alcohol use and increasing pregnancy preventative measures (e.g., Floyd et al., 1999). These programs demonstrate moderate success, however, they often fail to address overarching contexts that can facilitate and maintain these behaviors, which may make behaviors harder to change. Intimate partner violence (IPV) is a particularly important risk factor for AEP, as well as a risk factor for alcohol and birth control use. The current study examines the link between IPV and AEP from a prospective, preconceptual lens, while controlling for other preconceptual AEP risk behaviors, testing the potential importance of including IPV as an AEP risk factor to address in preconceptual AEP prevention programs. Go to: Links between IPV and AEP IPV strongly associates with AEP (Anderson et al., 2014; Kitsantas et al., 2015; Li et al., 2012; Skagerstrom et al., 2011). A main reason for this may be that IPV victimization is both a precedent of alcohol use (Capaldi et al., 2012; Foran & O’Leary, 2008) and an antecedent (Devries et al., 2014; Derrik & Testa, 2017; Simmons et al., 2015). IPV also relates to lower levels of contraceptive use (Bergman & Stockman, 2015; Deutsch, in press; Maxwell et al., 2015). Consequently, unintended pregnancy, another predictor of AEP (McDonald et al., 2014), is also associated with IPV (Miller et al., 2010; Pallitto et al., v 2005). Underlying mechanisms for the association between IPV and AEP are unclear. Most research examining this association is descriptive. However, associations between IPV and alcohol use can be explained by broader relationship conflict (e.g., Collibee & Furman, 2018; Eckhard et al., 2015; Leonard & Quigley, 1999) and personal coping strategies (e.g., Schumacher et al., 2008; Ivory & Kambouropoulos, 2012; Leonard & Eiden, 2007). Given that IPV can continue during pregnancy, or that pregnancy can contribute to new instances of IPV (James et al., 2013), pregnancy may not be a sufficient deterrent for reducing alcohol use, if underlying IPV-related shared variables strongly maintain levels of alcohol use. Additionally, substance use coercion is a form of IPV itself (Rivera et al., 2015; Warshaw et al., 2014). Thus, alcohol misuse, even within pregnancy, can be maintained in part by their IPV perpetrating partners. There are also underlying mechanisms explaining the association between IPV and lower birth control use. IPV-related lower birth control is associated with coercive control motives within a relationship (Tanha et al., 2010). Reproductive coercion, in which individuals gain power over their partners by removing their partners’ reproductive agency, relates to other forms of IPV (Katz et al., 2017). Pregnancy coercion, another form of IPV reproductive control, can also explain higher rates of unintended pregnancies in IPV-marked relationships (Miller et al., 2010). Although some research indicates that AEP is more prominent in older women (e.g., Harrison & Sidebottom, 2009), pathways between alcohol use, IPV, and low birth control use start in adolescence, (Roberts et al., 2005; Silverman et al., 2001; Teitelman et al., 2008). Therefore, the association between these variables has a strong developmental context and may require addressing underlying long-standing cognitive schemas or behavioral habits. Taken together, IPV, alcohol use, low levels of contraception, unintended pregnancy, and AEP may form long-term patterns of association with one another. However, more research is required to understand the genuine ways in which IPV functions as a potential AEP risk factor. It may be important to see if IPV strengthens other AEP risk factors, given the cyclic association between risk variables. In addition, although most studies examining AEP predictors only compare AEP to women who do not drink during pregnancy (e.g., Anderson et al., 2014; Kisantas et al., 2015) this does not accurately inform preconceptual prevention programs, which emphasize both reducing alcohol use and overall pregnancy. Prospective research that can compare AEP predictors to outcomes that are more favorable than AEP (non-pregnancy and non-drinking pregnancy) may provide insight for prevention programs. Go to: Pre-conceptual AEP prevention programs The most common format of AEP prevention programs are brief interventions emphasizing motivated behavioral change (e.g., Ceperich & Ingersoll, 2011 Floyd et al., 2007; Ingersoll et al., 2013). Interventions can include motivational interview counseling, assessment feedback, and contraception counseling (Velasquez et al., 2013), although there are also self-guided formats (e.g., Tenkku et al., 2011). Reduced drinking and increased birth control use is guided by a process of self-evaluation and developing plans of change for levels of alcohol use and birth control use (Floyd et al., 2007; Velasquez et al., 2010). The brevity of these programs makes it scalable and easy to implement without requiring a large number of resources, which can be crucial in resource-poor, in-need populations. Success of preconceptual AEP prevention programs is typically defined as either post-program decrease in alcohol use and/or an increase in birth control. These programs do achieve both of these aims (Floyd et al., 2007; Hutton et al., 2014), but have more success in increasing birth control than reducing alcohol use (e.g., Farrell-Caranhan, et al., 2013; Hanson et al., 2017; Wilton, et al., 2013). In other words, programs are more successful at reducing the number of overall potential pregnancies potentially exposed to alcohol, compared to reducing the amount of alcohol consumed that may affect the remaining pregnancies. One potential reason for this may be that these programs tend to focus exclusively on individual-level behavioral change, and do not necessarily account for environments that may provide substantial barriers for change. For example, women in relationships marked by IPV may have a more difficult time either trying to reduce alcohol misuse (e.g., out of a higher need for immediate coping) or trying to obtain birth control (out of fear of partner reactions or even due to active resistance from the partner; de Bocanegra et al., 2010). Go to: Current Study The purpose of this study is to explore ways in which IPV may serve as a risk factor for AEP. Although IPV is a known predictor of AEP, it will be important to know if IPV has contextual, moderating influences on other AEP predictors, particularly those emphasized as risk factors in preconceptual prevention programs. As the goals of preconceptual AEP prevention programs are to 1) reduce the number of pregnancies by increasing contraceptive use, and 2) reduce AEP by reducing alcohol use within pregnancies, we compared three outcomes: AEP, non-pregnancy, and no-alcohol-exposed pregnancy (nAEP.) Specifically, we wanted to know if IPV was a unique risk factor for AEP, controlling for birth control use and alcohol use. Utilizing a multi-level, longitudinal design, we were able to examine if IPV was a unique risk factor a) within people, over relationships, and b) between individuals. We hypothesized that within relationships, IPV would relate to higher odds of AEP. In addition, those who reported experiencing higher levels of IPV averaged over all relationships would have higher odds of AEP compared to those who reported lower or no levels of IPV averaged over all relationships. We also hypothesized the effects of birth control use and alcohol use would be similar to prior research. Higher alcohol use would relate to higher odds of AEP, and that higher birth control use would relate to lower odds of AEP (although perhaps only when comparing AEP to non-pregnancy). We also examined IPV as a potential moderating context. As IPV relates to both higher alcohol use and lower birth control, it is possible that IPV strengthens alcohol use and birth control effects on the odds of AEP. Therefore, we hypothesized that IPV would strengthen the positive effect that alcohol use has on the odds of AEP, and would strengthen the negative effect that birth control use has on the odds of AEP. We included controls of childhood abuse and adolescent intimate partner violence, as well as time-varying contextual variables of the age at the start of relationship and relationship duration. Childhood abuse was included as it is a predictor of AEP (Frankenberger et al., 2015; Whitfield et al., 2003), intimate partner violence victimization (Renner & Slack, 2006) and alcohol use and abuse in adolescence and adulthood (e.g., Dube et al., 2002; Shin et al., 2009). Adolescent intimate partner violence was also included due to relationships between adolescent and young adult re-victimization (Gomez, 2011). Go to: Method Participants Participants were from Wave 2 (WII) and 3 (WIII) of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health). A nationally-representative U.S. sample was first assessed at grades 7 – 12 in 1994–95 (WI), and then followed up in 1996 (WII), 2000–2001 (WIII) and 2004–2005 (Wave 4). Women who completed WII and WIII, reported more than one WIII romantic relationship, and reported alcohol onset by WIII were included in the present analyses. The final sample included 3460 observations for 2097 participants. Measures Adult (WIII) Pregnancy status. Pregnancy status was a three-category variable indicating non-pregnancy (0) nAEP (1) or AEP pregnancy (2) within each romantic relationship. Participants were asked detailed questions about each completed/current pregnancy, and each pregnancy was linked to a reported romantic/sexual relationship. AEP was specifically assessed by the question “During this pregnancy, how often did you drink alcoholic beverages?” for each pregnancy. Options ranged from 0 (never) to 4 (almost every day). This was collapsed to a binary AEP/non-AEP variable. Multiple pregnancies within a single relationship were aggregated. The non-AEP pregnancy code indicated no alcohol exposure for all reported pregnancies within that romantic/sexual relationship. An AEP pregnancy code indicated at least 1 alcohol-exposed pregnancy for all pregnancies within the specific romantic/sexual relationship. Adult (WIII) Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) Victimization. Respondents were asked about having had experienced physical IPV by every sexual partner they reported in WIII. This measure was adapted from the revised Conflicts and Tactics Scale (CTS2; Straus et al., 1996). Physical IPV was measured by asking how often one’s partner a) “has threatened you with violence, pushed or shoved you, or thrown something at you that could hurt”1, b) “has slapped, hit, or kicked you” or if “you had an injury such as a sprain, bruise, or cut because of a fight with (partner). Items were initially measured using a 7 point scale, from 0 (never) to 6 (more than 20 times), with an extra item for indicating that “this hasn’t happened in the past year, but did happen before then”. Items were re-coded with a binary absence/presence for the prevalence of each indicator of physical IPV (see Straus, 2004). The final score was the sum score for the three items. Adult (WIII) Consistent Birth Control Use: Participants were asked about their use of condoms and birth control for every sexual relationship that they reported in WIII. For every partner, individuals were asked if they had (vaginal) sex on one or more than one occasion. Those who reported having had sex only one time with each specific partner were asked if they had used any birth control, and for those that reported use, what birth control was used (respondents could choose up to three methods). Those who reported having had sex more than one time with each specific partner were asked if they used any birth control/what types of birth control for the first and most recent time they had sex. Individuals were coded as having had consistent birth control use if they reported using any effective birth control (condom, birth control pills, vaginal sponge, foam/jelly, diaphragm, IUD, Norplant, ring, Depo Provera or contraceptive film) for their only or both first and most recent times having had sex. Although the different birth control methods within the consistent birth control group may have varying levels of efficacy/failure (e.g., Kost et al., 2008), we chose to group these together due to the small sample sizes of methods other than condom use and hormonal birth control. Those who reported no birth control use at any time, either first or most recent times or those who reported using only withdrawal or the rhythm method for their BC were coded as having inconsistent birth control use. Adolescent (WII) IPV victimization was derived from a measure assessing WII reports of up to six sexual/romantic partners (up to three romantic and three non-romantic) they had in the past year (since the last interview at WI). Similar to the WIII measure, participants were asked if their partner(s) had ever threatened them with violence, pushed or shoved the participant or thrown something at the participant that could hurt them. However, these were assessed as binary, not frequency variables. These items were summed for each partner and then averaged across partners. Adolescent (WII) Alcohol Use Frequency. Alcohol use in adolescence was assessed via a past-year frequency variable at WII. This score was initially re-coded with dummy variables to account for abstainers, however, non-abstaining individuals who reported no past year use were also included in this category, as this was a small proportion of individuals (n = 77, 2.61%), and such models performed poorly when examining interactions, most likely due to small cell sizes. Therefore, there were two dummy codes reflecting three categories: abstainers/non-abstaining non-users, infrequent drinkers (those who reported drinking once a month or less), and moderate-to-high drinkers, who reported drinking at least two times a month.2 Control Variables. Two variables were included to contextualize the WIII time-varying romantic relationships. Length of each sexual relationship was calculated by subtracting the reported start and end dates (past relationship) or by subtracting the start and the interview date (current relationship). This variable was re-coded into an eight-point scale, ranging from 1 day (0) to more than 4 years (7). Age at start of each relationship was assessed by subtracting participants’ birth date from the reported start date of the relationship. Total number of adolescent (WII) relationships was added as a control for the WII physical violence victimization variable, to distinguish meaning between those who reported either no physically violent relationships or no relationships (both of which would result in scores of 0). This was assessed by counting the number of romantic relationship partners endorsed in the WII relationship measure. Childhood abuse was conceptualized as mistreatment by parents or adult caregivers prior to 6th grade (measured in WIII). Participants reported how often adults (parents or other adult caregivers) had slapped, hit, or kicked them, and how often they had “touched you in a sexual way, forced you to touch him or her in a sexual way, or forced you to have sexual relations”. Reporting physical or sexual abuse was coded with a “1” while reporting no physical or sexual abuse was coded with a “0”. Finally, age at WII was included to contextualize the adolescent alcohol use (e.g., contextualize differences between a 13-year-old drinker versus an 18-year-old drinker). Go to: Analytic Plan A generalized multi-level model nesting relationship within person-level effects compared pregnancy outcomes (AEP versus nAEP or non-pregnancy). This included four relationship-varying effects: IPV, consistent birth control use, age at the start of relationship, and length of relationship. Adolescent alcohol use frequency, IPV/relationship ratio, and the number of romantic partners, along with child abuse and race were considered non-relationship varying (between-person) variables. A main model was first estimated, as well as four models that examined two-way interactions between IPV and either birth control use, or adolescent alcohol use. Two IPV × adolescent alcohol use interactions were estimated: a cross-level within-person IPV × between-person alcohol use interaction, and a between-person IPV × between-person alcohol use interaction. For interactions between IPV and birth control use, there were four possibilities to explore: two cross-level interactions (a within-person IPV × between-person birth control interaction, and a within-person birth control and between-person IPV interaction), and two single-level interactions (within-person or between person only interactions). Only the first five relationships were included in this model due to low numbers in both the number of reported relationships after 5, as well as the number of reported relationships after 5 that also included pregnancies. Although individuals reported up to 48 relationships, 81.87% participants reported 1 – 5 relationships and 91.06% of relationships with pregnancy outcomes were reported for relationships 1 – 5. Person-means centering was used to assess the direct effects of within-person and between-person effects (Curran & Bauer, 2011) for IPV, age at the start of relationship, and length of relationship. A grand-means centered approach was used for the birth control variable (person-means centering is not advisable for binary variables). All models were estimated using Mplus TWOLEVEL COMPLEX function, which accounts for the stratified sampling and complex survey weights, and a robust maximum likelihood estimator to account for missingness of data. Go to: Results Total number of relationships reported were: 2 relationships (26.51%), 3 relationships (21.16%), 4 relationships (16.27%) and 5+ relationships (36.06%3). Table 1 presents the correlations and means/frequencies for all variables. Table 1. Correlations and means/frequencies of all variables across all relationships 1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11	12 1. Total Pregnancies	-											 2. Total AEP (for pregnancies only)	0.20**	-										 3. Average IPV Victimization Across Relationships	0.27**	0.13*	-									 4. Average Consistent BC Use Across Relationships	−0.29**	−0.11**	−0.17**	-								 5. Average Age at Start of relationship(s)	−0.08**	0.02	−0.04*	0.08**	-							 6. Average Length of Relationship(s)	0.24**	−0.10**	0.14**	−0.14**	−0.16**	-						 7. Adolescent Frequency of Drinking	0.11**	0.16**	0.10**	−0.04*	−0.01	0.06**	-					 8. Adolescent Physical IPV	0.15**	0.05	0.16**	−0.06**	−0.01	0.08**	0.10**	-				 9. Adolescent Total Sexual/Romantic Partners	0.05**	0.01	0.06**	−0.01	−0.15	0.02	0.18**	0.09**	-			 10. Child Abuse	0.05**	0.11**	0.12**	−0.08**	−0.03	−0.01	0.04	0.01	0.03	-		 11. Race	0.08**	0.04	0.03	−0.10**	0.06**	0.04*	−.07**	0.01-	0.04**	0.11**	-	 12. Age	0.14**	0.02	0.05**	−0.01	0.51**	0.19**	.20**	0.11**	0.14**	0.01	0.08**	-  Mean (SD) [Range] / Frequency												 0: 63.22% 1: 27.55% 2: 8.32% 3 – 9: 0.91%	0: 84.97 % 1: 13.20 % 2 – 3: 1.83%	0.62 (1.06) [0 – 6]	0.61 (0.37) [0 – 1]	19.06 (1.76) [15 – 26]	3.42 (1.64) [0 – 7]	1.48 (1.43)5	0.11 (0.39) [0 – 3]	0.91 (0.95) [0 – 5]	0.32 (0.47)	W: 56.59% B: 20.56% L: 15.01% A:6.26% AIAN:1.58%	16.08 (1.56) Open in a separate window *p<.05; **p<.01 Multilevel Models Multilevel models were first tested to see if random slopes were necessary in addition to a random intercept. There was no improvement in model fit when adding a random slope of time (Δχ2 (4) = 2.95, p>.05), or a random slope of IPV, (Δχ2 (2) =0.32, p>.05). Although adding a random slope of within-person birth control use significantly improved the model (Δχ2 (2) = 16.42, p<.05), this model did not converge when adding a subsequent cross-level interaction involving within-person IPV. Therefore, all models were estimated with random intercepts and fixed effects, except when estimating cross-level interactions. Intraclass correlation coefficients were also examined; both the non-pregnancy vs AEP group (ICC = 0.43) and the nAEP vs AEP group (ICC=0.60) had reasonable between-person variability. Within and between-person main effects of physical IPV, birth control use, and adolescent alcohol use on AEP Table 2 displays the main effects using either non-pregnancy or nAEP as the reference group. As indicated, there were within-person (relationship-specific) effects. For every increase in presence of a specific physical IPV indicator within a relationship, compared to other relationships, odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy increased by 164%. Similarly, there was a 1.36 higher odds of AEP compared to nAEP, in relationships with increased IPV indicators compared to other relationships. There were no within-person significant effects for birth control use. In other words, using birth control consistently within a relationship, compared to other relationships, did not significantly increase the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy or nAEP outcomes. Table 2. Multi-level model parameters for odd ratios of AEP compared to reference variables non-pregnancy and nAEP AEP (vs non-pregnancy)	AEP (vs nAEP) Level 1			 Within-person Physical IPV	1.64** (1.27 – 2.12)	1.36* (1.08 – 1.72) Within-person Consistent Birth Control Use	0.50 (0.27 – 0.91)	1.71 (0.96 – 3.07) Within-person Length of Relationship	1.14* (1.04 – 1.25)	0.88* (0.80 – 0.97) Within-person Age at Start of Relationship	0.98 (0.90 – 1.05)	1.05 (0.97 – 1.13) Level 2			 Between-person Physical IPV	2.00** (1.68 – 2.38)	1.54** (1.32 – 1.81) Between-person Consistent Birth Control Use	0.34** (0.18 – 0.66)	0.38* (0.20 – 0.73) Between-person Length of Relationship	0.94 (0.83 – 1.05)	0.72** (0.64 – 0.80) Between-person Age at Start of Relationship	0.77** (0.69 – 0.86)	0.91 (0.80 – 1.04) Adolescent Infrequent Past Year Drinking (vs non/Abs.)	1.44 (0.94 – 2.18)	1.75* (1.13 – 2.70) Adolescent Moderate-Heavy Past Year Drinking (vs non/Abs.)	1.76* (1.17 – 2.66)	1.95** (1.25 – 3.05) Average IPV Experiences in Adolescent Relationships	1.68** (1.24 – 2.28)	1.23 (0.92 – 1.65) Adolescent Total Romantic/Sexual Partners	1.33** (1.11 – 1.58)	1.16 (0.95 – 1.40) Child Abuse History	1.34 (0.94 – 1.94)	1.33 (0.91 – 1.95) African American (vs White)	1.35 (0.79 – 2.32)	0.59 (0.35 – 0.98) Latino/a (vs White)	0.81 (0.46 – 1.41)	0.63 (0.36 – 1.09) Other Race (vs White)	1.01 (0.43 – 2.34)	1.13 (0.47 – 2.71) Age at WII	1.22* (1.04 – 1.43)	0.99 (0.85 – 1.15) Open in a separate window *p<.05; **p<.01 Note: AEP = “alcohol-exposed pregnancy”; IPV = “intimate partner violence”; Abs = “abstinence from alcohol There were also significant between-person effects distinguishing non-pregnancy from AEP and nAEP from AEP. For every additional physical IPV indicator experienced within the five-year span (averaged over all relationships), compared to other individuals, increased the overall odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy by 200%, and increased the overall odds of AEP compared to nAEP by 154%. Therefore, not only did IPV have within-relationship influence, but also distinguished AEP outcomes between individuals. In addition, individuals who used birth control more consistently over the 5-year period compared to other individuals decreased odds of AEP by 66% (compared to non-pregnancy) and 62% (compared to nAEP). Finally, alcohol use in adolescence increased odds of AEP. Individuals who reported past-year infrequent drinking in adolescence, compared to those who reported abstention or no past year drinking, increased odds of overall AEP compared to nAEP in adulthood by 175%. Those who reported heavy or moderate past-year drinking in adolescence, compared to those who reported abstention or no past year drinking, increased odds of AEP in adulthood by 176% (compared to no-pregnancy) or 195% (compared to nAEP). Therefore, adolescent drinking overall increased higher odds of AEP compared to either non-pregnancy or nAEP outcomes in adulthood. Interactions between IPV, adolescent alcohol use, and birth control use Between-person IPV moderated the effect of infrequent past-year adolescent alcohol use on the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy (OR = 1.49, p<.05, (95% CI (1.09 – 2.05)) and AEP compared to nAEP, (OR = 1.63, p<.05, 95% CI (1.21 – 2.19)). As seen in Figure 1a–b, the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy (1a) or nAEP (1b) were generally low. However, experiencing higher levels of physical IPV substantially increased the effect of infrequent adolescent drinking on the odds of AEP. For example, when examining the odds of AEP compared to nAEP (Figure 1b) the odds of AEP for an infrequent adolescent drinker who experienced no IPV from any romantic relationship in the past five years was 0.15. The odds of AEP for an infrequent adolescent drinker who experienced high IPV (e.g., 3 unique physical IPV indicators averaged across all romantic relationships in the past five years) was 1.03. Comparatively, the odds of AEP for moderate to heavy adolescent drinkers was 0.29 to 0.55 for those who experienced no or high IPV respectively. In other words, higher levels of average physical IPV over the five-year period significantly increased the odds of AEP for infrequent adolescent drinkers, compared to non-drinkers, however, IPV experience did not significantly increase the odds of AEP for moderate-heavy adolescent drinkers, compared to non-drinkers. There were no other significant interactions of IPV on either adolescent alcohol use or birth control use (see Supplemental Table 1a–b). An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is nihms-1008931-f0001.jpg Figure 1A-B. Level 2 IPV × adolescent past year drinking frequency interaction predicting odds of AEP vs non-pregnancy (A) and AEP vs nAEP (B) Note: IPV levels indicate average items endorsed over all relationships in past 5 years. Range of IPV is from 0 (no items) to 3 (3 items). Post Hoc Tests Alcohol use was assessed at adolescence (WII) to ensure directionality. Although alcohol use was also assessed at WIII, there was no alcohol use information that accompanied the timeline of relationships or pregnancies beyond the measure of AEP. However, given that alcohol use will most likely change over the five years between WII and WIII (e.g., a trend towards increasing in later adolescence/young adulthood; Chassin et al., 2004), we also ran models using the WIII alcohol variable. As with the main models, there were two dummy codes reflecting three categories (no past-year use, infrequent past year use, and moderate – to – high past year use). As WIII abstainers had been excluded from the study sample, the young adult no past-year use category included only those who had reported any lifetime use, but no past year use. Supplemental Table 2 displays frequency tables for comparing adolescent and young adult drinking rates. Similarly, in adolescents and young adults, non-abstaining, non-past year drinkers and heavy drinkers had the lowest categories. Supplemental Table 3a–3b displays the WIII-alcohol use variable models. Similar to the WII alcohol-use model, individuals who reported moderate/heavy alcohol use at WIII had higher odds of (previously) reporting AEP compared to nAEP; compared to non-drinkers, those who reported moderate or heavy drinking had 353% higher odds of an AEP. However, there were no other significant associations between WIII alcohol use and AEP outcomes. In addition, compared to the WII-alcohol model, there were no within-person significant effects of IPV or birth control use on distinguishing AEP from nAEP. There were significant within-person effects distinguishing AEP from non-pregnancy, similar to the WII-alcohol use model. Between-person effects for IPV and birth control were similar to the WII-alcohol use model. There were also no significant interactions. Go to: Discussion The purpose of this study was to examine the role of physical IPV as a risk factor for AEP as a unique predictor and a potential moderator of the two main behaviors emphasized in preconceptional AEP prevention programs: alcohol use and birth control. We found that IPV was a strong influence on AEP both within specific relationships and between people. IPV had little moderating influence on AEP outcomes; the one significant interaction highlights the contexts in which IPV may strengthen the history of (adolescent) alcohol use on later AEP. Intimate partner violence as a main effect As hypothesized, IPV related to higher odds of AEP, alongside higher alcohol use and lower birth control use. Individuals experiencing higher physical IPV within the 5–year period, compared to individuals who experienced less physical IPV, had higher odds of reporting any AEP outcome. This is consistent with studies comparing pregnant women who do or do not abstain from alcohol use (e.g., Kitsantas et al., 2015; McDonald et al., 2014; Powers et al., 2013). Experiencing IPV also had a direct influence on AEP compared to non-pregnancy and nAEP as a within-person (within-relationship) effect. Given the variety of ways in which physical IPV related to AEP, multiple explanations are needed. The association between IPV and unintended pregnancy, typically via lower associated levels of birth control (Miller et al., 2010; Pallitto et al., 2005) could explain within-person effects of IPV. Physical IPV (as measured here), is often accompanied by other forms of IPV that can further facilitate pregnancy, such as sexual IPV or reproductive coercion (Katz et al., 2017; Tanha et al., 2010). Another contributing explanation, pertaining to the within-person effect of IPV on AEP versus nAEP, may be the continued or even new experiences of IPV during pregnancy. There are less reported instances of IPV during pregnancy compared to non-pregnancy (e.g., Silverman, et al., 2006), however relationships marked by IPV can continue into pregnancy (James et al., 2013), and such IPV tends to increase in severity during pregnancy (Brownridge, et al., 2011). Substance use can increase during this time (Martin et al., 2003), if used as a coping mechanism. Between-person IPV effects indicate additional third variable explanations for the association between physical IPV and AEP vs nAEP. Variables related to both AEP and IPV include anxiety (Alvik et al., 2006; Pico-Alfonso, et al., 2006) and illicit drug use (Anderson et al., 2012; Harrisson & Sidebottom, 2009). Third variable explanations may also include pervasive forms of IPV such as coercive control, psychological/emotional violence, or even substance use coercion itself (Rivera et al., 2015; Warshaw et al., 2014). These types of IPV result in negative health outcomes such as substance use or lower birth control that are as strong as, or stronger than physical IPV effects (e.g., Ansara & Hindin, 2010; Coker et al., 2002). Most research examining the relationship between IPV and AEP either do not classify IPV typology (Anderson et al., 2014), only assess physical IPV (Kisantas et al., 2015), or aggregate IPV forms (McDonald et al., 2014). Roberts et al., (2014) documented that, within women seeking services for pregnancy termination, psychological IPV did not predict AEP when controlling for physical IPV. However it is unknown if these results generalize to other pregnancy/preconceptual situations. Intimate partner violence as a moderator Contrary to hypotheses, IPV was not a prominent moderator for alcohol use or birth control. Infrequent drinking in adolescence, compared to abstinence / no past year drinking, related to increased odds of AEP in young adulthood for those experiencing more IPV. This interaction highlights the way that IPV, or related third-variable contexts, can increase AEP vulnerability for women with a history of lower-level adolescent drinking. The strong association between earlier high drinking trajectories and alcohol use disorders (Deutsch et al., 2017, Hingson et al., 2006) may explain the lack of interaction between IPV and higher levels of adolescent drinking. For heavier adolescent drinkers, alcohol cessation during pregnancy may be more difficult regardless of external environment (e.g., IPV experience). However, IPV contexts may potentially reinforce drinking for individuals with a history of lower level alcohol use; individuals who otherwise may be more likely to stop drinking during pregnancy (Anderson et al., 2014; Okeefe et al., 2015). Birth control effects were not strengthened by IPV. We expected that there might be an interaction due to the strong relationship between IPV and birth control use (Tanaha et al., 2010) and IPV and unintended pregnancy (Miller et al., 2010). It is possible that other IPV forms more related to birth control use (e.g., coercive control) would strengthen birth control use effects. Alternatively, interactions between IPV and birth control use may be more relevant for unintended pregnancy, compared to AEP outcomes. Given the strong relationship between unintended pregnancy and AEP (e.g., McDonald et al., 2014), it may be beneficial to examine a mediating relationship between IPV/birth control, unintended pregnancy, and AEP. Intimate Partner Violence as an indicator of AEP risk for intervention programs The current findings support the notion that IPV, and other (third-variable) predictors that may relate to both AEP and substance use, may warrant special attention in AEP prevention curricula, as IPV related to declines in both outcomes preferred over AEP: non-pregnancy and nAEP. Most preconceptual short-term AEP interventions demonstrate improvement in birth control use (e.g., Hanson et al., 2017; Ingersoll et al., 2013, 2018, Wilton et al., 2013), indicating AEP prevention through these programs is mostly due to non-pregnancy outcomes. Variables contributing to maintenance of alcohol use, or contexts in which substance use and low birth control use are part of a larger system of lack of control or autonomy, might need emphasis outside of the personal feedback, motivational interview, or self-guided behavioral change formats, particularly for women who become pregnant. Strengths and Limitations The longitudinal, prospective data is a strength of the study, allowing us to examine change within individuals (between relationships). We also compared AEP to both favorable outcomes for preconceptual AEP prevention programs: non-pregnancy and nAEP. Prior studies typically only compare AEP and nAEP (pregnancy samples; Anderson et al., 2012; Frankenberger et al., 2015; Skagerstrom et al., 2013). A main limitation is the lack of other important within-relationship variables, particularly alcohol use. Time between adolescent alcohol use and each relationship was up to five years (average time difference between WII age and mean age at relationship start [across all relationships] was 2.74 (SD = 1.67), average time difference between WII age and mean age at due date [across all pregnancies] was 3.42 (SD = 1.82)4. Although Add Health includes both WII and WIII past year alcohol use, we used WII to ensure directionality. Another potential issue was the sample age, as women who drink while pregnant tend to skew older (e.g., Meschke et al., 2013) than the youngest sample participants. It is also possible that participants did not recognize their alcohol consumption during pregnancy. Retrospective reports for alcohol use are potentially less valid than prospective reports, although AEP may be more under-reported within prospective studies (Alvik et al., 2006). Finally, we only examined physical IPV. Including other types of IPV (e.g., psychological, emotional, coercive control) could have produced different results. Implications and Future Directions It should be noted that longer-term, case-management style AEP interventions, in which participants connect to a variety of services, improve both birth control use and alcohol use behavior (e.g., Grant et al., 2005; Rasmussen et al., 2012). There is also a personal goal component, but these goals are more multidimensional (e.g., “personal skills management”). However, these programs may not be pragmatic in highly impoverished, resource-poor areas; adding emphasis on contextual components to brief, scalable AEP prevention programs may be more feasible. AEP risk involves more than high alcohol use and low birth control use. Highly complex biological and environmental etiologies for alcohol use and addiction may necessitate longer-term comprehensive care for interventions targeting reduction or abstinence. Such comprehensive care may also be needed for participants who have not only experienced IPV or trauma, but also for participants who live in resource-scarce areas or in areas with limited alternatives for social support (e.g., highly rural or isolated areas). Although current interventions have substantially reduced AEP, consideration of mental health and maladaptive environments as barriers for behavioral change are critical for developing new or improved programs. Go to: Supplementary Material Supp TableS1 Click here to view.(23K, docx) Supp TableS2 Click here to view.(16K, docx) Supp TableS3 Click here to view.(19K, docx) Go to: Acknowledgements: Funding for this study was provided by P20 GM121341–01. This research uses data from Add Health, a program project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris and designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for assistance in the original design. Information on how to obtain the Add Health data files is available on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth). No direct support was received from grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis. Go to: Footnotes 1This variable was a composite of psychological (threatening) and physical (pushing, shoving, throwing something that can hurt) items, which we included as a physical item. 2An additional category splitting apart moderate and heavy drinkers (e.g., drinking at least three days a week) was initially included in the model. However, due to similarly small cell sizes of this category (n=78, 2.65%) the moderate and high categories were combined. Estimations that include both the non-past year drinking and heavy drinking categories are available upon request. 3This includes individuals who reported five total relationships or more than five relationships 4A small percentage of individuals reported that their first relationship in the past five years started earlier than their reported age at WII (n=37). A small number of individuals also reported that their first pregnancy with their first partner from the past five years was prior to their age at WII (n=38). 5For correlation purposes, we used a continuous drinking frequency variable. However, for the dummy variables, 44.68% of participants reported total abstention or no past year drinking, 35.31% reported infrequent drinking, and 20% reported moderate to heavy drinking.

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
{'Relations': [{'VariableOneName': 'IPV', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Adolescent alcohol use', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Between-person birth control use', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'IPV', 'VariableTwoName': 'Contraceptive use', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Birth control within a relationship', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Consistent birth control use over a 5-year period or more', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'IPV', 'VariableTwoName': 'Birth control', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]}
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
{'Relations': [{'VariableOneName': 'Cognitive distraction', 'VariableTwoName': 'Rumination', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'Sadness', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Rumination', 'VariableTwoName': 'Sadness', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSA withdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Rumination Induction', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Induced distraction', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Forced-failure stress', 'VariableTwoName': 'RSAwithdrawal', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'MDD', 'VariableTwoName': 'Cardiovascular disease', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]}
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. Correlations are also observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma, all of which impact substance use patterns and disparities within these communities. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
{'Relations': [{'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance-related mortality', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Alcohol-related deaths', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Chronic liver disease', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN status', 'VariableTwoName': 'Drug-related issues', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance use initiation', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance use rates', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Living on reservations', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adolescents', 'VariableTwoName': 'Dropped out of school', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN adults who drink', 'VariableTwoName': 'Heavy, episodic drinking patterns', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Substance availability', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Trauma exposure', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Family and peer networks', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'AI/AN communities', 'VariableTwoName': 'Historical trauma', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]}
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

Abstract Background: Pre-conceptual prevention programs geared towards reducing alcohol-exposed pregnancy (AEP) typically emphasize behavioral change of alcohol use and birth control exclusively, but rarely consider other important AEP predictors that may affect behavioral change. Intimate partner violence (IPV) substantially relates to AEP and to AEP predictors, however, few studies have tested if IPV is a unique indicator of prospective AEP risk, as both a main effect and a contextual influence on alcohol use or birth control. Methods: Using Waves II and III of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health), multilevel logistic regression models were estimated, in which IPV and birth control (both within-person and between-person) and adolescent alcohol use (between-person only) were examined as unique predictors of AEP compared to both non-pregnancy and non-AEP outcomes over up-to-5 sexual relationships. Interactions between within-person and between-person IPV, and birth control or alcohol use were also tested. Results: Within-person and between-person IPV significantly related to higher odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy and non-AEP. Adolescent alcohol use had similarly increased odds for AEP when compared to non-pregnancy or non-AEP outcomes. Only between-person birth control use related to higher odds for AEP compared to non-pregnancy and non-AEP. Between-person IPV also moderated adolescent alcohol use on odds of AEP, such that infrequent adolescent drinkers had higher odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy or non-AEP if they experienced IPV over their relationships. Conclusions: IPV is a substantial predictor for AEP as both a direct influence within relationships (within-person) and between individuals (between-person). Intervention and prevention programs focused on reducing AEP may benefit from including IPV-specific curricula. Approximately 10% of women in the United States consume alcohol while pregnant (Popova et al., 2017). Consequently, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder is one of the most common birth defects in the U.S., with rates ranging from 0.1 per 1000 to 100 per 1000 births, depending upon measurement (May et al., 2009; May et al., 2018). Although there is considerable attention and effort devoted to alcohol use cessation in pregnancy (Chang, 2009; Mengel et al., 2006; Nilsen, 2009), a large proportion of AEP involves drinking prior to learning of pregnancy status (McCormack et al., 2017). Thus, many prevention programs focus on reducing AEP prior to pregnancy through decreasing alcohol use and increasing pregnancy preventative measures (e.g., Floyd et al., 1999). These programs demonstrate moderate success, however, they often fail to address overarching contexts that can facilitate and maintain these behaviors, which may make behaviors harder to change. Intimate partner violence (IPV) is a particularly important risk factor for AEP, as well as a risk factor for alcohol and birth control use. The current study examines the link between IPV and AEP from a prospective, preconceptual lens, while controlling for other preconceptual AEP risk behaviors, testing the potential importance of including IPV as an AEP risk factor to address in preconceptual AEP prevention programs. Go to: Links between IPV and AEP IPV strongly associates with AEP (Anderson et al., 2014; Kitsantas et al., 2015; Li et al., 2012; Skagerstrom et al., 2011). A main reason for this may be that IPV victimization is both a precedent of alcohol use (Capaldi et al., 2012; Foran & O’Leary, 2008) and an antecedent (Devries et al., 2014; Derrik & Testa, 2017; Simmons et al., 2015). IPV also relates to lower levels of contraceptive use (Bergman & Stockman, 2015; Deutsch, in press; Maxwell et al., 2015). Consequently, unintended pregnancy, another predictor of AEP (McDonald et al., 2014), is also associated with IPV (Miller et al., 2010; Pallitto et al., v 2005). Underlying mechanisms for the association between IPV and AEP are unclear. Most research examining this association is descriptive. However, associations between IPV and alcohol use can be explained by broader relationship conflict (e.g., Collibee & Furman, 2018; Eckhard et al., 2015; Leonard & Quigley, 1999) and personal coping strategies (e.g., Schumacher et al., 2008; Ivory & Kambouropoulos, 2012; Leonard & Eiden, 2007). Given that IPV can continue during pregnancy, or that pregnancy can contribute to new instances of IPV (James et al., 2013), pregnancy may not be a sufficient deterrent for reducing alcohol use, if underlying IPV-related shared variables strongly maintain levels of alcohol use. Additionally, substance use coercion is a form of IPV itself (Rivera et al., 2015; Warshaw et al., 2014). Thus, alcohol misuse, even within pregnancy, can be maintained in part by their IPV perpetrating partners. There are also underlying mechanisms explaining the association between IPV and lower birth control use. IPV-related lower birth control is associated with coercive control motives within a relationship (Tanha et al., 2010). Reproductive coercion, in which individuals gain power over their partners by removing their partners’ reproductive agency, relates to other forms of IPV (Katz et al., 2017). Pregnancy coercion, another form of IPV reproductive control, can also explain higher rates of unintended pregnancies in IPV-marked relationships (Miller et al., 2010). Although some research indicates that AEP is more prominent in older women (e.g., Harrison & Sidebottom, 2009), pathways between alcohol use, IPV, and low birth control use start in adolescence, (Roberts et al., 2005; Silverman et al., 2001; Teitelman et al., 2008). Therefore, the association between these variables has a strong developmental context and may require addressing underlying long-standing cognitive schemas or behavioral habits. Taken together, IPV, alcohol use, low levels of contraception, unintended pregnancy, and AEP may form long-term patterns of association with one another. However, more research is required to understand the genuine ways in which IPV functions as a potential AEP risk factor. It may be important to see if IPV strengthens other AEP risk factors, given the cyclic association between risk variables. In addition, although most studies examining AEP predictors only compare AEP to women who do not drink during pregnancy (e.g., Anderson et al., 2014; Kisantas et al., 2015) this does not accurately inform preconceptual prevention programs, which emphasize both reducing alcohol use and overall pregnancy. Prospective research that can compare AEP predictors to outcomes that are more favorable than AEP (non-pregnancy and non-drinking pregnancy) may provide insight for prevention programs. Go to: Pre-conceptual AEP prevention programs The most common format of AEP prevention programs are brief interventions emphasizing motivated behavioral change (e.g., Ceperich & Ingersoll, 2011 Floyd et al., 2007; Ingersoll et al., 2013). Interventions can include motivational interview counseling, assessment feedback, and contraception counseling (Velasquez et al., 2013), although there are also self-guided formats (e.g., Tenkku et al., 2011). Reduced drinking and increased birth control use is guided by a process of self-evaluation and developing plans of change for levels of alcohol use and birth control use (Floyd et al., 2007; Velasquez et al., 2010). The brevity of these programs makes it scalable and easy to implement without requiring a large number of resources, which can be crucial in resource-poor, in-need populations. Success of preconceptual AEP prevention programs is typically defined as either post-program decrease in alcohol use and/or an increase in birth control. These programs do achieve both of these aims (Floyd et al., 2007; Hutton et al., 2014), but have more success in increasing birth control than reducing alcohol use (e.g., Farrell-Caranhan, et al., 2013; Hanson et al., 2017; Wilton, et al., 2013). In other words, programs are more successful at reducing the number of overall potential pregnancies potentially exposed to alcohol, compared to reducing the amount of alcohol consumed that may affect the remaining pregnancies. One potential reason for this may be that these programs tend to focus exclusively on individual-level behavioral change, and do not necessarily account for environments that may provide substantial barriers for change. For example, women in relationships marked by IPV may have a more difficult time either trying to reduce alcohol misuse (e.g., out of a higher need for immediate coping) or trying to obtain birth control (out of fear of partner reactions or even due to active resistance from the partner; de Bocanegra et al., 2010). Go to: Current Study The purpose of this study is to explore ways in which IPV may serve as a risk factor for AEP. Although IPV is a known predictor of AEP, it will be important to know if IPV has contextual, moderating influences on other AEP predictors, particularly those emphasized as risk factors in preconceptual prevention programs. As the goals of preconceptual AEP prevention programs are to 1) reduce the number of pregnancies by increasing contraceptive use, and 2) reduce AEP by reducing alcohol use within pregnancies, we compared three outcomes: AEP, non-pregnancy, and no-alcohol-exposed pregnancy (nAEP.) Specifically, we wanted to know if IPV was a unique risk factor for AEP, controlling for birth control use and alcohol use. Utilizing a multi-level, longitudinal design, we were able to examine if IPV was a unique risk factor a) within people, over relationships, and b) between individuals. We hypothesized that within relationships, IPV would relate to higher odds of AEP. In addition, those who reported experiencing higher levels of IPV averaged over all relationships would have higher odds of AEP compared to those who reported lower or no levels of IPV averaged over all relationships. We also hypothesized the effects of birth control use and alcohol use would be similar to prior research. Higher alcohol use would relate to higher odds of AEP, and that higher birth control use would relate to lower odds of AEP (although perhaps only when comparing AEP to non-pregnancy). We also examined IPV as a potential moderating context. As IPV relates to both higher alcohol use and lower birth control, it is possible that IPV strengthens alcohol use and birth control effects on the odds of AEP. Therefore, we hypothesized that IPV would strengthen the positive effect that alcohol use has on the odds of AEP, and would strengthen the negative effect that birth control use has on the odds of AEP. We included controls of childhood abuse and adolescent intimate partner violence, as well as time-varying contextual variables of the age at the start of relationship and relationship duration. Childhood abuse was included as it is a predictor of AEP (Frankenberger et al., 2015; Whitfield et al., 2003), intimate partner violence victimization (Renner & Slack, 2006) and alcohol use and abuse in adolescence and adulthood (e.g., Dube et al., 2002; Shin et al., 2009). Adolescent intimate partner violence was also included due to relationships between adolescent and young adult re-victimization (Gomez, 2011). Go to: Method Participants Participants were from Wave 2 (WII) and 3 (WIII) of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health). A nationally-representative U.S. sample was first assessed at grades 7 – 12 in 1994–95 (WI), and then followed up in 1996 (WII), 2000–2001 (WIII) and 2004–2005 (Wave 4). Women who completed WII and WIII, reported more than one WIII romantic relationship, and reported alcohol onset by WIII were included in the present analyses. The final sample included 3460 observations for 2097 participants. Measures Adult (WIII) Pregnancy status. Pregnancy status was a three-category variable indicating non-pregnancy (0) nAEP (1) or AEP pregnancy (2) within each romantic relationship. Participants were asked detailed questions about each completed/current pregnancy, and each pregnancy was linked to a reported romantic/sexual relationship. AEP was specifically assessed by the question “During this pregnancy, how often did you drink alcoholic beverages?” for each pregnancy. Options ranged from 0 (never) to 4 (almost every day). This was collapsed to a binary AEP/non-AEP variable. Multiple pregnancies within a single relationship were aggregated. The non-AEP pregnancy code indicated no alcohol exposure for all reported pregnancies within that romantic/sexual relationship. An AEP pregnancy code indicated at least 1 alcohol-exposed pregnancy for all pregnancies within the specific romantic/sexual relationship. Adult (WIII) Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) Victimization. Respondents were asked about having had experienced physical IPV by every sexual partner they reported in WIII. This measure was adapted from the revised Conflicts and Tactics Scale (CTS2; Straus et al., 1996). Physical IPV was measured by asking how often one’s partner a) “has threatened you with violence, pushed or shoved you, or thrown something at you that could hurt”1, b) “has slapped, hit, or kicked you” or if “you had an injury such as a sprain, bruise, or cut because of a fight with (partner). Items were initially measured using a 7 point scale, from 0 (never) to 6 (more than 20 times), with an extra item for indicating that “this hasn’t happened in the past year, but did happen before then”. Items were re-coded with a binary absence/presence for the prevalence of each indicator of physical IPV (see Straus, 2004). The final score was the sum score for the three items. Adult (WIII) Consistent Birth Control Use: Participants were asked about their use of condoms and birth control for every sexual relationship that they reported in WIII. For every partner, individuals were asked if they had (vaginal) sex on one or more than one occasion. Those who reported having had sex only one time with each specific partner were asked if they had used any birth control, and for those that reported use, what birth control was used (respondents could choose up to three methods). Those who reported having had sex more than one time with each specific partner were asked if they used any birth control/what types of birth control for the first and most recent time they had sex. Individuals were coded as having had consistent birth control use if they reported using any effective birth control (condom, birth control pills, vaginal sponge, foam/jelly, diaphragm, IUD, Norplant, ring, Depo Provera or contraceptive film) for their only or both first and most recent times having had sex. Although the different birth control methods within the consistent birth control group may have varying levels of efficacy/failure (e.g., Kost et al., 2008), we chose to group these together due to the small sample sizes of methods other than condom use and hormonal birth control. Those who reported no birth control use at any time, either first or most recent times or those who reported using only withdrawal or the rhythm method for their BC were coded as having inconsistent birth control use. Adolescent (WII) IPV victimization was derived from a measure assessing WII reports of up to six sexual/romantic partners (up to three romantic and three non-romantic) they had in the past year (since the last interview at WI). Similar to the WIII measure, participants were asked if their partner(s) had ever threatened them with violence, pushed or shoved the participant or thrown something at the participant that could hurt them. However, these were assessed as binary, not frequency variables. These items were summed for each partner and then averaged across partners. Adolescent (WII) Alcohol Use Frequency. Alcohol use in adolescence was assessed via a past-year frequency variable at WII. This score was initially re-coded with dummy variables to account for abstainers, however, non-abstaining individuals who reported no past year use were also included in this category, as this was a small proportion of individuals (n = 77, 2.61%), and such models performed poorly when examining interactions, most likely due to small cell sizes. Therefore, there were two dummy codes reflecting three categories: abstainers/non-abstaining non-users, infrequent drinkers (those who reported drinking once a month or less), and moderate-to-high drinkers, who reported drinking at least two times a month.2 Control Variables. Two variables were included to contextualize the WIII time-varying romantic relationships. Length of each sexual relationship was calculated by subtracting the reported start and end dates (past relationship) or by subtracting the start and the interview date (current relationship). This variable was re-coded into an eight-point scale, ranging from 1 day (0) to more than 4 years (7). Age at start of each relationship was assessed by subtracting participants’ birth date from the reported start date of the relationship. Total number of adolescent (WII) relationships was added as a control for the WII physical violence victimization variable, to distinguish meaning between those who reported either no physically violent relationships or no relationships (both of which would result in scores of 0). This was assessed by counting the number of romantic relationship partners endorsed in the WII relationship measure. Childhood abuse was conceptualized as mistreatment by parents or adult caregivers prior to 6th grade (measured in WIII). Participants reported how often adults (parents or other adult caregivers) had slapped, hit, or kicked them, and how often they had “touched you in a sexual way, forced you to touch him or her in a sexual way, or forced you to have sexual relations”. Reporting physical or sexual abuse was coded with a “1” while reporting no physical or sexual abuse was coded with a “0”. Finally, age at WII was included to contextualize the adolescent alcohol use (e.g., contextualize differences between a 13-year-old drinker versus an 18-year-old drinker). Go to: Analytic Plan A generalized multi-level model nesting relationship within person-level effects compared pregnancy outcomes (AEP versus nAEP or non-pregnancy). This included four relationship-varying effects: IPV, consistent birth control use, age at the start of relationship, and length of relationship. Adolescent alcohol use frequency, IPV/relationship ratio, and the number of romantic partners, along with child abuse and race were considered non-relationship varying (between-person) variables. A main model was first estimated, as well as four models that examined two-way interactions between IPV and either birth control use, or adolescent alcohol use. Two IPV × adolescent alcohol use interactions were estimated: a cross-level within-person IPV × between-person alcohol use interaction, and a between-person IPV × between-person alcohol use interaction. For interactions between IPV and birth control use, there were four possibilities to explore: two cross-level interactions (a within-person IPV × between-person birth control interaction, and a within-person birth control and between-person IPV interaction), and two single-level interactions (within-person or between person only interactions). Only the first five relationships were included in this model due to low numbers in both the number of reported relationships after 5, as well as the number of reported relationships after 5 that also included pregnancies. Although individuals reported up to 48 relationships, 81.87% participants reported 1 – 5 relationships and 91.06% of relationships with pregnancy outcomes were reported for relationships 1 – 5. Person-means centering was used to assess the direct effects of within-person and between-person effects (Curran & Bauer, 2011) for IPV, age at the start of relationship, and length of relationship. A grand-means centered approach was used for the birth control variable (person-means centering is not advisable for binary variables). All models were estimated using Mplus TWOLEVEL COMPLEX function, which accounts for the stratified sampling and complex survey weights, and a robust maximum likelihood estimator to account for missingness of data. Go to: Results Total number of relationships reported were: 2 relationships (26.51%), 3 relationships (21.16%), 4 relationships (16.27%) and 5+ relationships (36.06%3). Table 1 presents the correlations and means/frequencies for all variables. Table 1. Correlations and means/frequencies of all variables across all relationships 1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11	12 1. Total Pregnancies	-											 2. Total AEP (for pregnancies only)	0.20**	-										 3. Average IPV Victimization Across Relationships	0.27**	0.13*	-									 4. Average Consistent BC Use Across Relationships	−0.29**	−0.11**	−0.17**	-								 5. Average Age at Start of relationship(s)	−0.08**	0.02	−0.04*	0.08**	-							 6. Average Length of Relationship(s)	0.24**	−0.10**	0.14**	−0.14**	−0.16**	-						 7. Adolescent Frequency of Drinking	0.11**	0.16**	0.10**	−0.04*	−0.01	0.06**	-					 8. Adolescent Physical IPV	0.15**	0.05	0.16**	−0.06**	−0.01	0.08**	0.10**	-				 9. Adolescent Total Sexual/Romantic Partners	0.05**	0.01	0.06**	−0.01	−0.15	0.02	0.18**	0.09**	-			 10. Child Abuse	0.05**	0.11**	0.12**	−0.08**	−0.03	−0.01	0.04	0.01	0.03	-		 11. Race	0.08**	0.04	0.03	−0.10**	0.06**	0.04*	−.07**	0.01-	0.04**	0.11**	-	 12. Age	0.14**	0.02	0.05**	−0.01	0.51**	0.19**	.20**	0.11**	0.14**	0.01	0.08**	-  Mean (SD) [Range] / Frequency												 0: 63.22% 1: 27.55% 2: 8.32% 3 – 9: 0.91%	0: 84.97 % 1: 13.20 % 2 – 3: 1.83%	0.62 (1.06) [0 – 6]	0.61 (0.37) [0 – 1]	19.06 (1.76) [15 – 26]	3.42 (1.64) [0 – 7]	1.48 (1.43)5	0.11 (0.39) [0 – 3]	0.91 (0.95) [0 – 5]	0.32 (0.47)	W: 56.59% B: 20.56% L: 15.01% A:6.26% AIAN:1.58%	16.08 (1.56) Open in a separate window *p<.05; **p<.01 Multilevel Models Multilevel models were first tested to see if random slopes were necessary in addition to a random intercept. There was no improvement in model fit when adding a random slope of time (Δχ2 (4) = 2.95, p>.05), or a random slope of IPV, (Δχ2 (2) =0.32, p>.05). Although adding a random slope of within-person birth control use significantly improved the model (Δχ2 (2) = 16.42, p<.05), this model did not converge when adding a subsequent cross-level interaction involving within-person IPV. Therefore, all models were estimated with random intercepts and fixed effects, except when estimating cross-level interactions. Intraclass correlation coefficients were also examined; both the non-pregnancy vs AEP group (ICC = 0.43) and the nAEP vs AEP group (ICC=0.60) had reasonable between-person variability. Within and between-person main effects of physical IPV, birth control use, and adolescent alcohol use on AEP Table 2 displays the main effects using either non-pregnancy or nAEP as the reference group. As indicated, there were within-person (relationship-specific) effects. For every increase in presence of a specific physical IPV indicator within a relationship, compared to other relationships, odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy increased by 164%. Similarly, there was a 1.36 higher odds of AEP compared to nAEP, in relationships with increased IPV indicators compared to other relationships. There were no within-person significant effects for birth control use. In other words, using birth control consistently within a relationship, compared to other relationships, did not significantly increase the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy or nAEP outcomes. Table 2. Multi-level model parameters for odd ratios of AEP compared to reference variables non-pregnancy and nAEP AEP (vs non-pregnancy)	AEP (vs nAEP) Level 1			 Within-person Physical IPV	1.64** (1.27 – 2.12)	1.36* (1.08 – 1.72) Within-person Consistent Birth Control Use	0.50 (0.27 – 0.91)	1.71 (0.96 – 3.07) Within-person Length of Relationship	1.14* (1.04 – 1.25)	0.88* (0.80 – 0.97) Within-person Age at Start of Relationship	0.98 (0.90 – 1.05)	1.05 (0.97 – 1.13) Level 2			 Between-person Physical IPV	2.00** (1.68 – 2.38)	1.54** (1.32 – 1.81) Between-person Consistent Birth Control Use	0.34** (0.18 – 0.66)	0.38* (0.20 – 0.73) Between-person Length of Relationship	0.94 (0.83 – 1.05)	0.72** (0.64 – 0.80) Between-person Age at Start of Relationship	0.77** (0.69 – 0.86)	0.91 (0.80 – 1.04) Adolescent Infrequent Past Year Drinking (vs non/Abs.)	1.44 (0.94 – 2.18)	1.75* (1.13 – 2.70) Adolescent Moderate-Heavy Past Year Drinking (vs non/Abs.)	1.76* (1.17 – 2.66)	1.95** (1.25 – 3.05) Average IPV Experiences in Adolescent Relationships	1.68** (1.24 – 2.28)	1.23 (0.92 – 1.65) Adolescent Total Romantic/Sexual Partners	1.33** (1.11 – 1.58)	1.16 (0.95 – 1.40) Child Abuse History	1.34 (0.94 – 1.94)	1.33 (0.91 – 1.95) African American (vs White)	1.35 (0.79 – 2.32)	0.59 (0.35 – 0.98) Latino/a (vs White)	0.81 (0.46 – 1.41)	0.63 (0.36 – 1.09) Other Race (vs White)	1.01 (0.43 – 2.34)	1.13 (0.47 – 2.71) Age at WII	1.22* (1.04 – 1.43)	0.99 (0.85 – 1.15) Open in a separate window *p<.05; **p<.01 Note: AEP = “alcohol-exposed pregnancy”; IPV = “intimate partner violence”; Abs = “abstinence from alcohol There were also significant between-person effects distinguishing non-pregnancy from AEP and nAEP from AEP. For every additional physical IPV indicator experienced within the five-year span (averaged over all relationships), compared to other individuals, increased the overall odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy by 200%, and increased the overall odds of AEP compared to nAEP by 154%. Therefore, not only did IPV have within-relationship influence, but also distinguished AEP outcomes between individuals. In addition, individuals who used birth control more consistently over the 5-year period compared to other individuals decreased odds of AEP by 66% (compared to non-pregnancy) and 62% (compared to nAEP). Finally, alcohol use in adolescence increased odds of AEP. Individuals who reported past-year infrequent drinking in adolescence, compared to those who reported abstention or no past year drinking, increased odds of overall AEP compared to nAEP in adulthood by 175%. Those who reported heavy or moderate past-year drinking in adolescence, compared to those who reported abstention or no past year drinking, increased odds of AEP in adulthood by 176% (compared to no-pregnancy) or 195% (compared to nAEP). Therefore, adolescent drinking overall increased higher odds of AEP compared to either non-pregnancy or nAEP outcomes in adulthood. Interactions between IPV, adolescent alcohol use, and birth control use Between-person IPV moderated the effect of infrequent past-year adolescent alcohol use on the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy (OR = 1.49, p<.05, (95% CI (1.09 – 2.05)) and AEP compared to nAEP, (OR = 1.63, p<.05, 95% CI (1.21 – 2.19)). As seen in Figure 1a–b, the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy (1a) or nAEP (1b) were generally low. However, experiencing higher levels of physical IPV substantially increased the effect of infrequent adolescent drinking on the odds of AEP. For example, when examining the odds of AEP compared to nAEP (Figure 1b) the odds of AEP for an infrequent adolescent drinker who experienced no IPV from any romantic relationship in the past five years was 0.15. The odds of AEP for an infrequent adolescent drinker who experienced high IPV (e.g., 3 unique physical IPV indicators averaged across all romantic relationships in the past five years) was 1.03. Comparatively, the odds of AEP for moderate to heavy adolescent drinkers was 0.29 to 0.55 for those who experienced no or high IPV respectively. In other words, higher levels of average physical IPV over the five-year period significantly increased the odds of AEP for infrequent adolescent drinkers, compared to non-drinkers, however, IPV experience did not significantly increase the odds of AEP for moderate-heavy adolescent drinkers, compared to non-drinkers. There were no other significant interactions of IPV on either adolescent alcohol use or birth control use (see Supplemental Table 1a–b). An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is nihms-1008931-f0001.jpg Figure 1A-B. Level 2 IPV × adolescent past year drinking frequency interaction predicting odds of AEP vs non-pregnancy (A) and AEP vs nAEP (B) Note: IPV levels indicate average items endorsed over all relationships in past 5 years. Range of IPV is from 0 (no items) to 3 (3 items). Post Hoc Tests Alcohol use was assessed at adolescence (WII) to ensure directionality. Although alcohol use was also assessed at WIII, there was no alcohol use information that accompanied the timeline of relationships or pregnancies beyond the measure of AEP. However, given that alcohol use will most likely change over the five years between WII and WIII (e.g., a trend towards increasing in later adolescence/young adulthood; Chassin et al., 2004), we also ran models using the WIII alcohol variable. As with the main models, there were two dummy codes reflecting three categories (no past-year use, infrequent past year use, and moderate – to – high past year use). As WIII abstainers had been excluded from the study sample, the young adult no past-year use category included only those who had reported any lifetime use, but no past year use. Supplemental Table 2 displays frequency tables for comparing adolescent and young adult drinking rates. Similarly, in adolescents and young adults, non-abstaining, non-past year drinkers and heavy drinkers had the lowest categories. Supplemental Table 3a–3b displays the WIII-alcohol use variable models. Similar to the WII alcohol-use model, individuals who reported moderate/heavy alcohol use at WIII had higher odds of (previously) reporting AEP compared to nAEP; compared to non-drinkers, those who reported moderate or heavy drinking had 353% higher odds of an AEP. However, there were no other significant associations between WIII alcohol use and AEP outcomes. In addition, compared to the WII-alcohol model, there were no within-person significant effects of IPV or birth control use on distinguishing AEP from nAEP. There were significant within-person effects distinguishing AEP from non-pregnancy, similar to the WII-alcohol use model. Between-person effects for IPV and birth control were similar to the WII-alcohol use model. There were also no significant interactions. Go to: Discussion The purpose of this study was to examine the role of physical IPV as a risk factor for AEP as a unique predictor and a potential moderator of the two main behaviors emphasized in preconceptional AEP prevention programs: alcohol use and birth control. We found that IPV was a strong influence on AEP both within specific relationships and between people. IPV had little moderating influence on AEP outcomes; the one significant interaction highlights the contexts in which IPV may strengthen the history of (adolescent) alcohol use on later AEP. Intimate partner violence as a main effect As hypothesized, IPV related to higher odds of AEP, alongside higher alcohol use and lower birth control use. Individuals experiencing higher physical IPV within the 5–year period, compared to individuals who experienced less physical IPV, had higher odds of reporting any AEP outcome. This is consistent with studies comparing pregnant women who do or do not abstain from alcohol use (e.g., Kitsantas et al., 2015; McDonald et al., 2014; Powers et al., 2013). Experiencing IPV also had a direct influence on AEP compared to non-pregnancy and nAEP as a within-person (within-relationship) effect. Given the variety of ways in which physical IPV related to AEP, multiple explanations are needed. The association between IPV and unintended pregnancy, typically via lower associated levels of birth control (Miller et al., 2010; Pallitto et al., 2005) could explain within-person effects of IPV. Physical IPV (as measured here), is often accompanied by other forms of IPV that can further facilitate pregnancy, such as sexual IPV or reproductive coercion (Katz et al., 2017; Tanha et al., 2010). Another contributing explanation, pertaining to the within-person effect of IPV on AEP versus nAEP, may be the continued or even new experiences of IPV during pregnancy. There are less reported instances of IPV during pregnancy compared to non-pregnancy (e.g., Silverman, et al., 2006), however relationships marked by IPV can continue into pregnancy (James et al., 2013), and such IPV tends to increase in severity during pregnancy (Brownridge, et al., 2011). Substance use can increase during this time (Martin et al., 2003), if used as a coping mechanism. Between-person IPV effects indicate additional third variable explanations for the association between physical IPV and AEP vs nAEP. Variables related to both AEP and IPV include anxiety (Alvik et al., 2006; Pico-Alfonso, et al., 2006) and illicit drug use (Anderson et al., 2012; Harrisson & Sidebottom, 2009). Third variable explanations may also include pervasive forms of IPV such as coercive control, psychological/emotional violence, or even substance use coercion itself (Rivera et al., 2015; Warshaw et al., 2014). These types of IPV result in negative health outcomes such as substance use or lower birth control that are as strong as, or stronger than physical IPV effects (e.g., Ansara & Hindin, 2010; Coker et al., 2002). Most research examining the relationship between IPV and AEP either do not classify IPV typology (Anderson et al., 2014), only assess physical IPV (Kisantas et al., 2015), or aggregate IPV forms (McDonald et al., 2014). Roberts et al., (2014) documented that, within women seeking services for pregnancy termination, psychological IPV did not predict AEP when controlling for physical IPV. However it is unknown if these results generalize to other pregnancy/preconceptual situations. Intimate partner violence as a moderator Contrary to hypotheses, IPV was not a prominent moderator for alcohol use or birth control. Infrequent drinking in adolescence, compared to abstinence / no past year drinking, related to increased odds of AEP in young adulthood for those experiencing more IPV. This interaction highlights the way that IPV, or related third-variable contexts, can increase AEP vulnerability for women with a history of lower-level adolescent drinking. The strong association between earlier high drinking trajectories and alcohol use disorders (Deutsch et al., 2017, Hingson et al., 2006) may explain the lack of interaction between IPV and higher levels of adolescent drinking. For heavier adolescent drinkers, alcohol cessation during pregnancy may be more difficult regardless of external environment (e.g., IPV experience). However, IPV contexts may potentially reinforce drinking for individuals with a history of lower level alcohol use; individuals who otherwise may be more likely to stop drinking during pregnancy (Anderson et al., 2014; Okeefe et al., 2015). Birth control effects were not strengthened by IPV. We expected that there might be an interaction due to the strong relationship between IPV and birth control use (Tanaha et al., 2010) and IPV and unintended pregnancy (Miller et al., 2010). It is possible that other IPV forms more related to birth control use (e.g., coercive control) would strengthen birth control use effects. Alternatively, interactions between IPV and birth control use may be more relevant for unintended pregnancy, compared to AEP outcomes. Given the strong relationship between unintended pregnancy and AEP (e.g., McDonald et al., 2014), it may be beneficial to examine a mediating relationship between IPV/birth control, unintended pregnancy, and AEP. Intimate Partner Violence as an indicator of AEP risk for intervention programs The current findings support the notion that IPV, and other (third-variable) predictors that may relate to both AEP and substance use, may warrant special attention in AEP prevention curricula, as IPV related to declines in both outcomes preferred over AEP: non-pregnancy and nAEP. Most preconceptual short-term AEP interventions demonstrate improvement in birth control use (e.g., Hanson et al., 2017; Ingersoll et al., 2013, 2018, Wilton et al., 2013), indicating AEP prevention through these programs is mostly due to non-pregnancy outcomes. Variables contributing to maintenance of alcohol use, or contexts in which substance use and low birth control use are part of a larger system of lack of control or autonomy, might need emphasis outside of the personal feedback, motivational interview, or self-guided behavioral change formats, particularly for women who become pregnant. Strengths and Limitations The longitudinal, prospective data is a strength of the study, allowing us to examine change within individuals (between relationships). We also compared AEP to both favorable outcomes for preconceptual AEP prevention programs: non-pregnancy and nAEP. Prior studies typically only compare AEP and nAEP (pregnancy samples; Anderson et al., 2012; Frankenberger et al., 2015; Skagerstrom et al., 2013). A main limitation is the lack of other important within-relationship variables, particularly alcohol use. Time between adolescent alcohol use and each relationship was up to five years (average time difference between WII age and mean age at relationship start [across all relationships] was 2.74 (SD = 1.67), average time difference between WII age and mean age at due date [across all pregnancies] was 3.42 (SD = 1.82)4. Although Add Health includes both WII and WIII past year alcohol use, we used WII to ensure directionality. Another potential issue was the sample age, as women who drink while pregnant tend to skew older (e.g., Meschke et al., 2013) than the youngest sample participants. It is also possible that participants did not recognize their alcohol consumption during pregnancy. Retrospective reports for alcohol use are potentially less valid than prospective reports, although AEP may be more under-reported within prospective studies (Alvik et al., 2006). Finally, we only examined physical IPV. Including other types of IPV (e.g., psychological, emotional, coercive control) could have produced different results. Implications and Future Directions It should be noted that longer-term, case-management style AEP interventions, in which participants connect to a variety of services, improve both birth control use and alcohol use behavior (e.g., Grant et al., 2005; Rasmussen et al., 2012). There is also a personal goal component, but these goals are more multidimensional (e.g., “personal skills management”). However, these programs may not be pragmatic in highly impoverished, resource-poor areas; adding emphasis on contextual components to brief, scalable AEP prevention programs may be more feasible. AEP risk involves more than high alcohol use and low birth control use. Highly complex biological and environmental etiologies for alcohol use and addiction may necessitate longer-term comprehensive care for interventions targeting reduction or abstinence. Such comprehensive care may also be needed for participants who have not only experienced IPV or trauma, but also for participants who live in resource-scarce areas or in areas with limited alternatives for social support (e.g., highly rural or isolated areas). Although current interventions have substantially reduced AEP, consideration of mental health and maladaptive environments as barriers for behavioral change are critical for developing new or improved programs. Go to: Supplementary Material Supp TableS1 Click here to view.(23K, docx) Supp TableS2 Click here to view.(16K, docx) Supp TableS3 Click here to view.(19K, docx) Go to: Acknowledgements: Funding for this study was provided by P20 GM121341–01. This research uses data from Add Health, a program project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris and designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for assistance in the original design. Information on how to obtain the Add Health data files is available on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth). No direct support was received from grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis. Go to: Footnotes 1This variable was a composite of psychological (threatening) and physical (pushing, shoving, throwing something that can hurt) items, which we included as a physical item. 2An additional category splitting apart moderate and heavy drinkers (e.g., drinking at least three days a week) was initially included in the model. However, due to similarly small cell sizes of this category (n=78, 2.65%) the moderate and high categories were combined. Estimations that include both the non-past year drinking and heavy drinking categories are available upon request. 3This includes individuals who reported five total relationships or more than five relationships 4A small percentage of individuals reported that their first relationship in the past five years started earlier than their reported age at WII (n=37). A small number of individuals also reported that their first pregnancy with their first partner from the past five years was prior to their age at WII (n=38). 5For correlation purposes, we used a continuous drinking frequency variable. However, for the dummy variables, 44.68% of participants reported total abstention or no past year drinking, 35.31% reported infrequent drinking, and 20% reported moderate to heavy drinking.

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
{'Relations': [{'VariableOneName': 'IPV', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Adolescent alcohol use', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Between-person birth control use', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'IPV', 'VariableTwoName': 'Contraceptive use', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Birth control within a relationship', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'Consistent birth control use over a 5-year period or more', 'VariableTwoName': 'AEP', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}, {'VariableOneName': 'IPV', 'VariableTwoName': 'Birth control', 'RelationshipClassification': '', 'IsCausal': '', 'SupportingText': ''}]}
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
Cognitive distraction -> Rumination
Forced-failure stress -> Sadness
Rumination -> Sadness
Forced-failure stress -> RSA withdrawal
Rumination Induction -> RSAwithdrawal
Induced distraction -> RSAwithdrawal
Forced-failure stress -> RSAwithdrawal
MDD -> Cardiovascular disease
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. Correlations are also observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma, all of which impact substance use patterns and disparities within these communities. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
AI/AN status -> Substance-related mortality
AI/AN status -> Alcohol-related deaths
AI/AN status -> Chronic liver disease
AI/AN status -> Drug-related issues
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use initiation
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use rates
AI/AN adolescents -> Living on reservations
AI/AN adolescents -> Dropped out of school
AI/AN adults who drink -> Heavy, episodic drinking patterns
AI/AN communities -> Substance availability
AI/AN communities -> Trauma exposure
AI/AN communities -> Family and peer networks
AI/AN communities -> Historical trauma
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
Cognitive distraction -> Rumination
Forced-failure stress -> Sadness
Rumination -> Sadness
Forced-failure stress -> RSA withdrawal
Rumination Induction -> RSAwithdrawal
Induced distraction -> RSAwithdrawal
Forced-failure stress -> RSAwithdrawal
MDD -> Cardiovascular disease
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_

Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```

Below is a list of relationships, please fill in the fields according to the above instructions.
Cognitive distraction -> Rumination
Forced-failure stress -> Sadness
Rumination -> Sadness
Forced-failure stress -> RSA withdrawal
Rumination Induction -> RSAwithdrawal
Induced distraction -> RSAwithdrawal
Forced-failure stress -> RSAwithdrawal
MDD -> Cardiovascular disease
End of relationships to fill in, fill in all relationships.
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal", "SupportingText"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should 
Cognitive distraction -> Rumination
Forced-failure stress -> Sadness
Rumination -> Sadness
Forced-failure stress -> RSA withdrawal
Rumination Induction -> RSAwithdrawal
Induced distraction -> RSAwithdrawal
Forced-failure stress -> RSAwithdrawal
MDD -> Cardiovascular disease
End of the list of relationships
END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should 
Cognitive distraction -> Rumination
Forced-failure stress -> Sadness
Rumination -> Sadness
Forced-failure stress -> RSA withdrawal
Rumination Induction -> RSAwithdrawal
Induced distraction -> RSAwithdrawal
Forced-failure stress -> RSAwithdrawal
MDD -> Cardiovascular disease
End of the list of relationships

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation between "Country's per capita income" and "Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing, at the start please inform which section of the paper it came from, i.e. the abstract, methods, discussions, conclusions, or some other section.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should 
Cognitive distraction -> Rumination
Forced-failure stress -> Sadness
Rumination -> Sadness
Forced-failure stress -> RSA withdrawal
Rumination Induction -> RSAwithdrawal
Induced distraction -> RSAwithdrawal
Forced-failure stress -> RSAwithdrawal
MDD -> Cardiovascular disease
End of the list of relationships

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be inverse.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should 
Cognitive distraction -> Rumination
Forced-failure stress -> Sadness
Rumination -> Sadness
Forced-failure stress -> RSA withdrawal
Rumination Induction -> RSAwithdrawal
Induced distraction -> RSAwithdrawal
Forced-failure stress -> RSAwithdrawal
MDD -> Cardiovascular disease
End of the list of relationships

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be inverse.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Cognitive distraction -> Rumination
Forced-failure stress -> Sadness
Rumination -> Sadness
Forced-failure stress -> RSA withdrawal
Rumination Induction -> RSAwithdrawal
Induced distraction -> RSAwithdrawal
Forced-failure stress -> RSAwithdrawal
MDD -> Cardiovascular disease
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be inverse.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Cognitive distraction -> Rumination
Forced-failure stress -> Sadness
Rumination -> Sadness
Forced-failure stress -> RSA withdrawal
Rumination Induction -> RSAwithdrawal
Induced distraction -> RSAwithdrawal
Forced-failure stress -> RSAwithdrawal
MDD -> Cardiovascular disease
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be inverse.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 8 relations:
Cognitive distraction -> Rumination
Forced-failure stress -> Sadness
Rumination -> Sadness
Forced-failure stress -> RSA withdrawal
Rumination Induction -> RSAwithdrawal
Induced distraction -> RSAwithdrawal
Forced-failure stress -> RSAwithdrawal
MDD -> Cardiovascular disease
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be inverse.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 8 relations:
Cognitive distraction -> Rumination
Forced-failure stress -> Sadness
Rumination -> Sadness
Forced-failure stress -> RSA withdrawal
Rumination Induction -> RSAwithdrawal
Induced distraction -> RSAwithdrawal
Forced-failure stress -> RSAwithdrawal
MDD -> Cardiovascular disease
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be inverse.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 8 relations:
Cognitive distraction -> Rumination
Forced-failure stress -> Sadness
Rumination -> Sadness
Forced-failure stress -> RSA withdrawal
Rumination Induction -> RSAwithdrawal
Induced distraction -> RSAwithdrawal
Forced-failure stress -> RSAwithdrawal
MDD -> Cardiovascular disease
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. Correlations are also observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma, all of which impact substance use patterns and disparities within these communities. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be inverse.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 13 relations:
AI/AN status -> Substance-related mortality
AI/AN status -> Alcohol-related deaths
AI/AN status -> Chronic liver disease
AI/AN status -> Drug-related issues
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use initiation
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use rates
AI/AN adolescents -> Living on reservations
AI/AN adolescents -> Dropped out of school
AI/AN adults who drink -> Heavy, episodic drinking patterns
AI/AN communities -> Substance availability
AI/AN communities -> Trauma exposure
AI/AN communities -> Family and peer networks
AI/AN communities -> Historical trauma
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
Abstract Background: Pre-conceptual prevention programs geared towards reducing alcohol-exposed pregnancy (AEP) typically emphasize behavioral change of alcohol use and birth control exclusively, but rarely consider other important AEP predictors that may affect behavioral change. Intimate partner violence (IPV) substantially relates to AEP and to AEP predictors, however, few studies have tested if IPV is a unique indicator of prospective AEP risk, as both a main effect and a contextual influence on alcohol use or birth control. Methods: Using Waves II and III of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health), multilevel logistic regression models were estimated, in which IPV and birth control (both within-person and between-person) and adolescent alcohol use (between-person only) were examined as unique predictors of AEP compared to both non-pregnancy and non-AEP outcomes over up-to-5 sexual relationships. Interactions between within-person and between-person IPV, and birth control or alcohol use were also tested. Results: Within-person and between-person IPV significantly related to higher odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy and non-AEP. Adolescent alcohol use had similarly increased odds for AEP when compared to non-pregnancy or non-AEP outcomes. Only between-person birth control use related to higher odds for AEP compared to non-pregnancy and non-AEP. Between-person IPV also moderated adolescent alcohol use on odds of AEP, such that infrequent adolescent drinkers had higher odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy or non-AEP if they experienced IPV over their relationships. Conclusions: IPV is a substantial predictor for AEP as both a direct influence within relationships (within-person) and between individuals (between-person). Intervention and prevention programs focused on reducing AEP may benefit from including IPV-specific curricula. Approximately 10% of women in the United States consume alcohol while pregnant (Popova et al., 2017). Consequently, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder is one of the most common birth defects in the U.S., with rates ranging from 0.1 per 1000 to 100 per 1000 births, depending upon measurement (May et al., 2009; May et al., 2018). Although there is considerable attention and effort devoted to alcohol use cessation in pregnancy (Chang, 2009; Mengel et al., 2006; Nilsen, 2009), a large proportion of AEP involves drinking prior to learning of pregnancy status (McCormack et al., 2017). Thus, many prevention programs focus on reducing AEP prior to pregnancy through decreasing alcohol use and increasing pregnancy preventative measures (e.g., Floyd et al., 1999). These programs demonstrate moderate success, however, they often fail to address overarching contexts that can facilitate and maintain these behaviors, which may make behaviors harder to change. Intimate partner violence (IPV) is a particularly important risk factor for AEP, as well as a risk factor for alcohol and birth control use. The current study examines the link between IPV and AEP from a prospective, preconceptual lens, while controlling for other preconceptual AEP risk behaviors, testing the potential importance of including IPV as an AEP risk factor to address in preconceptual AEP prevention programs. Go to: Links between IPV and AEP IPV strongly associates with AEP (Anderson et al., 2014; Kitsantas et al., 2015; Li et al., 2012; Skagerstrom et al., 2011). A main reason for this may be that IPV victimization is both a precedent of alcohol use (Capaldi et al., 2012; Foran & O’Leary, 2008) and an antecedent (Devries et al., 2014; Derrik & Testa, 2017; Simmons et al., 2015). IPV also relates to lower levels of contraceptive use (Bergman & Stockman, 2015; Deutsch, in press; Maxwell et al., 2015). Consequently, unintended pregnancy, another predictor of AEP (McDonald et al., 2014), is also associated with IPV (Miller et al., 2010; Pallitto et al., v 2005). Underlying mechanisms for the association between IPV and AEP are unclear. Most research examining this association is descriptive. However, associations between IPV and alcohol use can be explained by broader relationship conflict (e.g., Collibee & Furman, 2018; Eckhard et al., 2015; Leonard & Quigley, 1999) and personal coping strategies (e.g., Schumacher et al., 2008; Ivory & Kambouropoulos, 2012; Leonard & Eiden, 2007). Given that IPV can continue during pregnancy, or that pregnancy can contribute to new instances of IPV (James et al., 2013), pregnancy may not be a sufficient deterrent for reducing alcohol use, if underlying IPV-related shared variables strongly maintain levels of alcohol use. Additionally, substance use coercion is a form of IPV itself (Rivera et al., 2015; Warshaw et al., 2014). Thus, alcohol misuse, even within pregnancy, can be maintained in part by their IPV perpetrating partners. There are also underlying mechanisms explaining the association between IPV and lower birth control use. IPV-related lower birth control is associated with coercive control motives within a relationship (Tanha et al., 2010). Reproductive coercion, in which individuals gain power over their partners by removing their partners’ reproductive agency, relates to other forms of IPV (Katz et al., 2017). Pregnancy coercion, another form of IPV reproductive control, can also explain higher rates of unintended pregnancies in IPV-marked relationships (Miller et al., 2010). Although some research indicates that AEP is more prominent in older women (e.g., Harrison & Sidebottom, 2009), pathways between alcohol use, IPV, and low birth control use start in adolescence, (Roberts et al., 2005; Silverman et al., 2001; Teitelman et al., 2008). Therefore, the association between these variables has a strong developmental context and may require addressing underlying long-standing cognitive schemas or behavioral habits. Taken together, IPV, alcohol use, low levels of contraception, unintended pregnancy, and AEP may form long-term patterns of association with one another. However, more research is required to understand the genuine ways in which IPV functions as a potential AEP risk factor. It may be important to see if IPV strengthens other AEP risk factors, given the cyclic association between risk variables. In addition, although most studies examining AEP predictors only compare AEP to women who do not drink during pregnancy (e.g., Anderson et al., 2014; Kisantas et al., 2015) this does not accurately inform preconceptual prevention programs, which emphasize both reducing alcohol use and overall pregnancy. Prospective research that can compare AEP predictors to outcomes that are more favorable than AEP (non-pregnancy and non-drinking pregnancy) may provide insight for prevention programs. Go to: Pre-conceptual AEP prevention programs The most common format of AEP prevention programs are brief interventions emphasizing motivated behavioral change (e.g., Ceperich & Ingersoll, 2011 Floyd et al., 2007; Ingersoll et al., 2013). Interventions can include motivational interview counseling, assessment feedback, and contraception counseling (Velasquez et al., 2013), although there are also self-guided formats (e.g., Tenkku et al., 2011). Reduced drinking and increased birth control use is guided by a process of self-evaluation and developing plans of change for levels of alcohol use and birth control use (Floyd et al., 2007; Velasquez et al., 2010). The brevity of these programs makes it scalable and easy to implement without requiring a large number of resources, which can be crucial in resource-poor, in-need populations. Success of preconceptual AEP prevention programs is typically defined as either post-program decrease in alcohol use and/or an increase in birth control. These programs do achieve both of these aims (Floyd et al., 2007; Hutton et al., 2014), but have more success in increasing birth control than reducing alcohol use (e.g., Farrell-Caranhan, et al., 2013; Hanson et al., 2017; Wilton, et al., 2013). In other words, programs are more successful at reducing the number of overall potential pregnancies potentially exposed to alcohol, compared to reducing the amount of alcohol consumed that may affect the remaining pregnancies. One potential reason for this may be that these programs tend to focus exclusively on individual-level behavioral change, and do not necessarily account for environments that may provide substantial barriers for change. For example, women in relationships marked by IPV may have a more difficult time either trying to reduce alcohol misuse (e.g., out of a higher need for immediate coping) or trying to obtain birth control (out of fear of partner reactions or even due to active resistance from the partner; de Bocanegra et al., 2010). Go to: Current Study The purpose of this study is to explore ways in which IPV may serve as a risk factor for AEP. Although IPV is a known predictor of AEP, it will be important to know if IPV has contextual, moderating influences on other AEP predictors, particularly those emphasized as risk factors in preconceptual prevention programs. As the goals of preconceptual AEP prevention programs are to 1) reduce the number of pregnancies by increasing contraceptive use, and 2) reduce AEP by reducing alcohol use within pregnancies, we compared three outcomes: AEP, non-pregnancy, and no-alcohol-exposed pregnancy (nAEP.) Specifically, we wanted to know if IPV was a unique risk factor for AEP, controlling for birth control use and alcohol use. Utilizing a multi-level, longitudinal design, we were able to examine if IPV was a unique risk factor a) within people, over relationships, and b) between individuals. We hypothesized that within relationships, IPV would relate to higher odds of AEP. In addition, those who reported experiencing higher levels of IPV averaged over all relationships would have higher odds of AEP compared to those who reported lower or no levels of IPV averaged over all relationships. We also hypothesized the effects of birth control use and alcohol use would be similar to prior research. Higher alcohol use would relate to higher odds of AEP, and that higher birth control use would relate to lower odds of AEP (although perhaps only when comparing AEP to non-pregnancy). We also examined IPV as a potential moderating context. As IPV relates to both higher alcohol use and lower birth control, it is possible that IPV strengthens alcohol use and birth control effects on the odds of AEP. Therefore, we hypothesized that IPV would strengthen the positive effect that alcohol use has on the odds of AEP, and would strengthen the negative effect that birth control use has on the odds of AEP. We included controls of childhood abuse and adolescent intimate partner violence, as well as time-varying contextual variables of the age at the start of relationship and relationship duration. Childhood abuse was included as it is a predictor of AEP (Frankenberger et al., 2015; Whitfield et al., 2003), intimate partner violence victimization (Renner & Slack, 2006) and alcohol use and abuse in adolescence and adulthood (e.g., Dube et al., 2002; Shin et al., 2009). Adolescent intimate partner violence was also included due to relationships between adolescent and young adult re-victimization (Gomez, 2011). Go to: Method Participants Participants were from Wave 2 (WII) and 3 (WIII) of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health). A nationally-representative U.S. sample was first assessed at grades 7 – 12 in 1994–95 (WI), and then followed up in 1996 (WII), 2000–2001 (WIII) and 2004–2005 (Wave 4). Women who completed WII and WIII, reported more than one WIII romantic relationship, and reported alcohol onset by WIII were included in the present analyses. The final sample included 3460 observations for 2097 participants. Measures Adult (WIII) Pregnancy status. Pregnancy status was a three-category variable indicating non-pregnancy (0) nAEP (1) or AEP pregnancy (2) within each romantic relationship. Participants were asked detailed questions about each completed/current pregnancy, and each pregnancy was linked to a reported romantic/sexual relationship. AEP was specifically assessed by the question “During this pregnancy, how often did you drink alcoholic beverages?” for each pregnancy. Options ranged from 0 (never) to 4 (almost every day). This was collapsed to a binary AEP/non-AEP variable. Multiple pregnancies within a single relationship were aggregated. The non-AEP pregnancy code indicated no alcohol exposure for all reported pregnancies within that romantic/sexual relationship. An AEP pregnancy code indicated at least 1 alcohol-exposed pregnancy for all pregnancies within the specific romantic/sexual relationship. Adult (WIII) Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) Victimization. Respondents were asked about having had experienced physical IPV by every sexual partner they reported in WIII. This measure was adapted from the revised Conflicts and Tactics Scale (CTS2; Straus et al., 1996). Physical IPV was measured by asking how often one’s partner a) “has threatened you with violence, pushed or shoved you, or thrown something at you that could hurt”1, b) “has slapped, hit, or kicked you” or if “you had an injury such as a sprain, bruise, or cut because of a fight with (partner). Items were initially measured using a 7 point scale, from 0 (never) to 6 (more than 20 times), with an extra item for indicating that “this hasn’t happened in the past year, but did happen before then”. Items were re-coded with a binary absence/presence for the prevalence of each indicator of physical IPV (see Straus, 2004). The final score was the sum score for the three items. Adult (WIII) Consistent Birth Control Use: Participants were asked about their use of condoms and birth control for every sexual relationship that they reported in WIII. For every partner, individuals were asked if they had (vaginal) sex on one or more than one occasion. Those who reported having had sex only one time with each specific partner were asked if they had used any birth control, and for those that reported use, what birth control was used (respondents could choose up to three methods). Those who reported having had sex more than one time with each specific partner were asked if they used any birth control/what types of birth control for the first and most recent time they had sex. Individuals were coded as having had consistent birth control use if they reported using any effective birth control (condom, birth control pills, vaginal sponge, foam/jelly, diaphragm, IUD, Norplant, ring, Depo Provera or contraceptive film) for their only or both first and most recent times having had sex. Although the different birth control methods within the consistent birth control group may have varying levels of efficacy/failure (e.g., Kost et al., 2008), we chose to group these together due to the small sample sizes of methods other than condom use and hormonal birth control. Those who reported no birth control use at any time, either first or most recent times or those who reported using only withdrawal or the rhythm method for their BC were coded as having inconsistent birth control use. Adolescent (WII) IPV victimization was derived from a measure assessing WII reports of up to six sexual/romantic partners (up to three romantic and three non-romantic) they had in the past year (since the last interview at WI). Similar to the WIII measure, participants were asked if their partner(s) had ever threatened them with violence, pushed or shoved the participant or thrown something at the participant that could hurt them. However, these were assessed as binary, not frequency variables. These items were summed for each partner and then averaged across partners. Adolescent (WII) Alcohol Use Frequency. Alcohol use in adolescence was assessed via a past-year frequency variable at WII. This score was initially re-coded with dummy variables to account for abstainers, however, non-abstaining individuals who reported no past year use were also included in this category, as this was a small proportion of individuals (n = 77, 2.61%), and such models performed poorly when examining interactions, most likely due to small cell sizes. Therefore, there were two dummy codes reflecting three categories: abstainers/non-abstaining non-users, infrequent drinkers (those who reported drinking once a month or less), and moderate-to-high drinkers, who reported drinking at least two times a month.2 Control Variables. Two variables were included to contextualize the WIII time-varying romantic relationships. Length of each sexual relationship was calculated by subtracting the reported start and end dates (past relationship) or by subtracting the start and the interview date (current relationship). This variable was re-coded into an eight-point scale, ranging from 1 day (0) to more than 4 years (7). Age at start of each relationship was assessed by subtracting participants’ birth date from the reported start date of the relationship. Total number of adolescent (WII) relationships was added as a control for the WII physical violence victimization variable, to distinguish meaning between those who reported either no physically violent relationships or no relationships (both of which would result in scores of 0). This was assessed by counting the number of romantic relationship partners endorsed in the WII relationship measure. Childhood abuse was conceptualized as mistreatment by parents or adult caregivers prior to 6th grade (measured in WIII). Participants reported how often adults (parents or other adult caregivers) had slapped, hit, or kicked them, and how often they had “touched you in a sexual way, forced you to touch him or her in a sexual way, or forced you to have sexual relations”. Reporting physical or sexual abuse was coded with a “1” while reporting no physical or sexual abuse was coded with a “0”. Finally, age at WII was included to contextualize the adolescent alcohol use (e.g., contextualize differences between a 13-year-old drinker versus an 18-year-old drinker). Go to: Analytic Plan A generalized multi-level model nesting relationship within person-level effects compared pregnancy outcomes (AEP versus nAEP or non-pregnancy). This included four relationship-varying effects: IPV, consistent birth control use, age at the start of relationship, and length of relationship. Adolescent alcohol use frequency, IPV/relationship ratio, and the number of romantic partners, along with child abuse and race were considered non-relationship varying (between-person) variables. A main model was first estimated, as well as four models that examined two-way interactions between IPV and either birth control use, or adolescent alcohol use. Two IPV × adolescent alcohol use interactions were estimated: a cross-level within-person IPV × between-person alcohol use interaction, and a between-person IPV × between-person alcohol use interaction. For interactions between IPV and birth control use, there were four possibilities to explore: two cross-level interactions (a within-person IPV × between-person birth control interaction, and a within-person birth control and between-person IPV interaction), and two single-level interactions (within-person or between person only interactions). Only the first five relationships were included in this model due to low numbers in both the number of reported relationships after 5, as well as the number of reported relationships after 5 that also included pregnancies. Although individuals reported up to 48 relationships, 81.87% participants reported 1 – 5 relationships and 91.06% of relationships with pregnancy outcomes were reported for relationships 1 – 5. Person-means centering was used to assess the direct effects of within-person and between-person effects (Curran & Bauer, 2011) for IPV, age at the start of relationship, and length of relationship. A grand-means centered approach was used for the birth control variable (person-means centering is not advisable for binary variables). All models were estimated using Mplus TWOLEVEL COMPLEX function, which accounts for the stratified sampling and complex survey weights, and a robust maximum likelihood estimator to account for missingness of data. Go to: Results Total number of relationships reported were: 2 relationships (26.51%), 3 relationships (21.16%), 4 relationships (16.27%) and 5+ relationships (36.06%3). Table 1 presents the correlations and means/frequencies for all variables. Table 1. Correlations and means/frequencies of all variables across all relationships 1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11	12 1. Total Pregnancies	-											 2. Total AEP (for pregnancies only)	0.20**	-										 3. Average IPV Victimization Across Relationships	0.27**	0.13*	-									 4. Average Consistent BC Use Across Relationships	−0.29**	−0.11**	−0.17**	-								 5. Average Age at Start of relationship(s)	−0.08**	0.02	−0.04*	0.08**	-							 6. Average Length of Relationship(s)	0.24**	−0.10**	0.14**	−0.14**	−0.16**	-						 7. Adolescent Frequency of Drinking	0.11**	0.16**	0.10**	−0.04*	−0.01	0.06**	-					 8. Adolescent Physical IPV	0.15**	0.05	0.16**	−0.06**	−0.01	0.08**	0.10**	-				 9. Adolescent Total Sexual/Romantic Partners	0.05**	0.01	0.06**	−0.01	−0.15	0.02	0.18**	0.09**	-			 10. Child Abuse	0.05**	0.11**	0.12**	−0.08**	−0.03	−0.01	0.04	0.01	0.03	-		 11. Race	0.08**	0.04	0.03	−0.10**	0.06**	0.04*	−.07**	0.01-	0.04**	0.11**	-	 12. Age	0.14**	0.02	0.05**	−0.01	0.51**	0.19**	.20**	0.11**	0.14**	0.01	0.08**	-  Mean (SD) [Range] / Frequency												 0: 63.22% 1: 27.55% 2: 8.32% 3 – 9: 0.91%	0: 84.97 % 1: 13.20 % 2 – 3: 1.83%	0.62 (1.06) [0 – 6]	0.61 (0.37) [0 – 1]	19.06 (1.76) [15 – 26]	3.42 (1.64) [0 – 7]	1.48 (1.43)5	0.11 (0.39) [0 – 3]	0.91 (0.95) [0 – 5]	0.32 (0.47)	W: 56.59% B: 20.56% L: 15.01% A:6.26% AIAN:1.58%	16.08 (1.56) Open in a separate window *p<.05; **p<.01 Multilevel Models Multilevel models were first tested to see if random slopes were necessary in addition to a random intercept. There was no improvement in model fit when adding a random slope of time (Δχ2 (4) = 2.95, p>.05), or a random slope of IPV, (Δχ2 (2) =0.32, p>.05). Although adding a random slope of within-person birth control use significantly improved the model (Δχ2 (2) = 16.42, p<.05), this model did not converge when adding a subsequent cross-level interaction involving within-person IPV. Therefore, all models were estimated with random intercepts and fixed effects, except when estimating cross-level interactions. Intraclass correlation coefficients were also examined; both the non-pregnancy vs AEP group (ICC = 0.43) and the nAEP vs AEP group (ICC=0.60) had reasonable between-person variability. Within and between-person main effects of physical IPV, birth control use, and adolescent alcohol use on AEP Table 2 displays the main effects using either non-pregnancy or nAEP as the reference group. As indicated, there were within-person (relationship-specific) effects. For every increase in presence of a specific physical IPV indicator within a relationship, compared to other relationships, odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy increased by 164%. Similarly, there was a 1.36 higher odds of AEP compared to nAEP, in relationships with increased IPV indicators compared to other relationships. There were no within-person significant effects for birth control use. In other words, using birth control consistently within a relationship, compared to other relationships, did not significantly increase the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy or nAEP outcomes. Table 2. Multi-level model parameters for odd ratios of AEP compared to reference variables non-pregnancy and nAEP AEP (vs non-pregnancy)	AEP (vs nAEP) Level 1			 Within-person Physical IPV	1.64** (1.27 – 2.12)	1.36* (1.08 – 1.72) Within-person Consistent Birth Control Use	0.50 (0.27 – 0.91)	1.71 (0.96 – 3.07) Within-person Length of Relationship	1.14* (1.04 – 1.25)	0.88* (0.80 – 0.97) Within-person Age at Start of Relationship	0.98 (0.90 – 1.05)	1.05 (0.97 – 1.13) Level 2			 Between-person Physical IPV	2.00** (1.68 – 2.38)	1.54** (1.32 – 1.81) Between-person Consistent Birth Control Use	0.34** (0.18 – 0.66)	0.38* (0.20 – 0.73) Between-person Length of Relationship	0.94 (0.83 – 1.05)	0.72** (0.64 – 0.80) Between-person Age at Start of Relationship	0.77** (0.69 – 0.86)	0.91 (0.80 – 1.04) Adolescent Infrequent Past Year Drinking (vs non/Abs.)	1.44 (0.94 – 2.18)	1.75* (1.13 – 2.70) Adolescent Moderate-Heavy Past Year Drinking (vs non/Abs.)	1.76* (1.17 – 2.66)	1.95** (1.25 – 3.05) Average IPV Experiences in Adolescent Relationships	1.68** (1.24 – 2.28)	1.23 (0.92 – 1.65) Adolescent Total Romantic/Sexual Partners	1.33** (1.11 – 1.58)	1.16 (0.95 – 1.40) Child Abuse History	1.34 (0.94 – 1.94)	1.33 (0.91 – 1.95) African American (vs White)	1.35 (0.79 – 2.32)	0.59 (0.35 – 0.98) Latino/a (vs White)	0.81 (0.46 – 1.41)	0.63 (0.36 – 1.09) Other Race (vs White)	1.01 (0.43 – 2.34)	1.13 (0.47 – 2.71) Age at WII	1.22* (1.04 – 1.43)	0.99 (0.85 – 1.15) Open in a separate window *p<.05; **p<.01 Note: AEP = “alcohol-exposed pregnancy”; IPV = “intimate partner violence”; Abs = “abstinence from alcohol There were also significant between-person effects distinguishing non-pregnancy from AEP and nAEP from AEP. For every additional physical IPV indicator experienced within the five-year span (averaged over all relationships), compared to other individuals, increased the overall odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy by 200%, and increased the overall odds of AEP compared to nAEP by 154%. Therefore, not only did IPV have within-relationship influence, but also distinguished AEP outcomes between individuals. In addition, individuals who used birth control more consistently over the 5-year period compared to other individuals decreased odds of AEP by 66% (compared to non-pregnancy) and 62% (compared to nAEP). Finally, alcohol use in adolescence increased odds of AEP. Individuals who reported past-year infrequent drinking in adolescence, compared to those who reported abstention or no past year drinking, increased odds of overall AEP compared to nAEP in adulthood by 175%. Those who reported heavy or moderate past-year drinking in adolescence, compared to those who reported abstention or no past year drinking, increased odds of AEP in adulthood by 176% (compared to no-pregnancy) or 195% (compared to nAEP). Therefore, adolescent drinking overall increased higher odds of AEP compared to either non-pregnancy or nAEP outcomes in adulthood. Interactions between IPV, adolescent alcohol use, and birth control use Between-person IPV moderated the effect of infrequent past-year adolescent alcohol use on the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy (OR = 1.49, p<.05, (95% CI (1.09 – 2.05)) and AEP compared to nAEP, (OR = 1.63, p<.05, 95% CI (1.21 – 2.19)). As seen in Figure 1a–b, the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy (1a) or nAEP (1b) were generally low. However, experiencing higher levels of physical IPV substantially increased the effect of infrequent adolescent drinking on the odds of AEP. For example, when examining the odds of AEP compared to nAEP (Figure 1b) the odds of AEP for an infrequent adolescent drinker who experienced no IPV from any romantic relationship in the past five years was 0.15. The odds of AEP for an infrequent adolescent drinker who experienced high IPV (e.g., 3 unique physical IPV indicators averaged across all romantic relationships in the past five years) was 1.03. Comparatively, the odds of AEP for moderate to heavy adolescent drinkers was 0.29 to 0.55 for those who experienced no or high IPV respectively. In other words, higher levels of average physical IPV over the five-year period significantly increased the odds of AEP for infrequent adolescent drinkers, compared to non-drinkers, however, IPV experience did not significantly increase the odds of AEP for moderate-heavy adolescent drinkers, compared to non-drinkers. There were no other significant interactions of IPV on either adolescent alcohol use or birth control use (see Supplemental Table 1a–b). An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is nihms-1008931-f0001.jpg Figure 1A-B. Level 2 IPV × adolescent past year drinking frequency interaction predicting odds of AEP vs non-pregnancy (A) and AEP vs nAEP (B) Note: IPV levels indicate average items endorsed over all relationships in past 5 years. Range of IPV is from 0 (no items) to 3 (3 items). Post Hoc Tests Alcohol use was assessed at adolescence (WII) to ensure directionality. Although alcohol use was also assessed at WIII, there was no alcohol use information that accompanied the timeline of relationships or pregnancies beyond the measure of AEP. However, given that alcohol use will most likely change over the five years between WII and WIII (e.g., a trend towards increasing in later adolescence/young adulthood; Chassin et al., 2004), we also ran models using the WIII alcohol variable. As with the main models, there were two dummy codes reflecting three categories (no past-year use, infrequent past year use, and moderate – to – high past year use). As WIII abstainers had been excluded from the study sample, the young adult no past-year use category included only those who had reported any lifetime use, but no past year use. Supplemental Table 2 displays frequency tables for comparing adolescent and young adult drinking rates. Similarly, in adolescents and young adults, non-abstaining, non-past year drinkers and heavy drinkers had the lowest categories. Supplemental Table 3a–3b displays the WIII-alcohol use variable models. Similar to the WII alcohol-use model, individuals who reported moderate/heavy alcohol use at WIII had higher odds of (previously) reporting AEP compared to nAEP; compared to non-drinkers, those who reported moderate or heavy drinking had 353% higher odds of an AEP. However, there were no other significant associations between WIII alcohol use and AEP outcomes. In addition, compared to the WII-alcohol model, there were no within-person significant effects of IPV or birth control use on distinguishing AEP from nAEP. There were significant within-person effects distinguishing AEP from non-pregnancy, similar to the WII-alcohol use model. Between-person effects for IPV and birth control were similar to the WII-alcohol use model. There were also no significant interactions. Go to: Discussion The purpose of this study was to examine the role of physical IPV as a risk factor for AEP as a unique predictor and a potential moderator of the two main behaviors emphasized in preconceptional AEP prevention programs: alcohol use and birth control. We found that IPV was a strong influence on AEP both within specific relationships and between people. IPV had little moderating influence on AEP outcomes; the one significant interaction highlights the contexts in which IPV may strengthen the history of (adolescent) alcohol use on later AEP. Intimate partner violence as a main effect As hypothesized, IPV related to higher odds of AEP, alongside higher alcohol use and lower birth control use. Individuals experiencing higher physical IPV within the 5–year period, compared to individuals who experienced less physical IPV, had higher odds of reporting any AEP outcome. This is consistent with studies comparing pregnant women who do or do not abstain from alcohol use (e.g., Kitsantas et al., 2015; McDonald et al., 2014; Powers et al., 2013). Experiencing IPV also had a direct influence on AEP compared to non-pregnancy and nAEP as a within-person (within-relationship) effect. Given the variety of ways in which physical IPV related to AEP, multiple explanations are needed. The association between IPV and unintended pregnancy, typically via lower associated levels of birth control (Miller et al., 2010; Pallitto et al., 2005) could explain within-person effects of IPV. Physical IPV (as measured here), is often accompanied by other forms of IPV that can further facilitate pregnancy, such as sexual IPV or reproductive coercion (Katz et al., 2017; Tanha et al., 2010). Another contributing explanation, pertaining to the within-person effect of IPV on AEP versus nAEP, may be the continued or even new experiences of IPV during pregnancy. There are less reported instances of IPV during pregnancy compared to non-pregnancy (e.g., Silverman, et al., 2006), however relationships marked by IPV can continue into pregnancy (James et al., 2013), and such IPV tends to increase in severity during pregnancy (Brownridge, et al., 2011). Substance use can increase during this time (Martin et al., 2003), if used as a coping mechanism. Between-person IPV effects indicate additional third variable explanations for the association between physical IPV and AEP vs nAEP. Variables related to both AEP and IPV include anxiety (Alvik et al., 2006; Pico-Alfonso, et al., 2006) and illicit drug use (Anderson et al., 2012; Harrisson & Sidebottom, 2009). Third variable explanations may also include pervasive forms of IPV such as coercive control, psychological/emotional violence, or even substance use coercion itself (Rivera et al., 2015; Warshaw et al., 2014). These types of IPV result in negative health outcomes such as substance use or lower birth control that are as strong as, or stronger than physical IPV effects (e.g., Ansara & Hindin, 2010; Coker et al., 2002). Most research examining the relationship between IPV and AEP either do not classify IPV typology (Anderson et al., 2014), only assess physical IPV (Kisantas et al., 2015), or aggregate IPV forms (McDonald et al., 2014). Roberts et al., (2014) documented that, within women seeking services for pregnancy termination, psychological IPV did not predict AEP when controlling for physical IPV. However it is unknown if these results generalize to other pregnancy/preconceptual situations. Intimate partner violence as a moderator Contrary to hypotheses, IPV was not a prominent moderator for alcohol use or birth control. Infrequent drinking in adolescence, compared to abstinence / no past year drinking, related to increased odds of AEP in young adulthood for those experiencing more IPV. This interaction highlights the way that IPV, or related third-variable contexts, can increase AEP vulnerability for women with a history of lower-level adolescent drinking. The strong association between earlier high drinking trajectories and alcohol use disorders (Deutsch et al., 2017, Hingson et al., 2006) may explain the lack of interaction between IPV and higher levels of adolescent drinking. For heavier adolescent drinkers, alcohol cessation during pregnancy may be more difficult regardless of external environment (e.g., IPV experience). However, IPV contexts may potentially reinforce drinking for individuals with a history of lower level alcohol use; individuals who otherwise may be more likely to stop drinking during pregnancy (Anderson et al., 2014; Okeefe et al., 2015). Birth control effects were not strengthened by IPV. We expected that there might be an interaction due to the strong relationship between IPV and birth control use (Tanaha et al., 2010) and IPV and unintended pregnancy (Miller et al., 2010). It is possible that other IPV forms more related to birth control use (e.g., coercive control) would strengthen birth control use effects. Alternatively, interactions between IPV and birth control use may be more relevant for unintended pregnancy, compared to AEP outcomes. Given the strong relationship between unintended pregnancy and AEP (e.g., McDonald et al., 2014), it may be beneficial to examine a mediating relationship between IPV/birth control, unintended pregnancy, and AEP. Intimate Partner Violence as an indicator of AEP risk for intervention programs The current findings support the notion that IPV, and other (third-variable) predictors that may relate to both AEP and substance use, may warrant special attention in AEP prevention curricula, as IPV related to declines in both outcomes preferred over AEP: non-pregnancy and nAEP. Most preconceptual short-term AEP interventions demonstrate improvement in birth control use (e.g., Hanson et al., 2017; Ingersoll et al., 2013, 2018, Wilton et al., 2013), indicating AEP prevention through these programs is mostly due to non-pregnancy outcomes. Variables contributing to maintenance of alcohol use, or contexts in which substance use and low birth control use are part of a larger system of lack of control or autonomy, might need emphasis outside of the personal feedback, motivational interview, or self-guided behavioral change formats, particularly for women who become pregnant. Strengths and Limitations The longitudinal, prospective data is a strength of the study, allowing us to examine change within individuals (between relationships). We also compared AEP to both favorable outcomes for preconceptual AEP prevention programs: non-pregnancy and nAEP. Prior studies typically only compare AEP and nAEP (pregnancy samples; Anderson et al., 2012; Frankenberger et al., 2015; Skagerstrom et al., 2013). A main limitation is the lack of other important within-relationship variables, particularly alcohol use. Time between adolescent alcohol use and each relationship was up to five years (average time difference between WII age and mean age at relationship start [across all relationships] was 2.74 (SD = 1.67), average time difference between WII age and mean age at due date [across all pregnancies] was 3.42 (SD = 1.82)4. Although Add Health includes both WII and WIII past year alcohol use, we used WII to ensure directionality. Another potential issue was the sample age, as women who drink while pregnant tend to skew older (e.g., Meschke et al., 2013) than the youngest sample participants. It is also possible that participants did not recognize their alcohol consumption during pregnancy. Retrospective reports for alcohol use are potentially less valid than prospective reports, although AEP may be more under-reported within prospective studies (Alvik et al., 2006). Finally, we only examined physical IPV. Including other types of IPV (e.g., psychological, emotional, coercive control) could have produced different results. Implications and Future Directions It should be noted that longer-term, case-management style AEP interventions, in which participants connect to a variety of services, improve both birth control use and alcohol use behavior (e.g., Grant et al., 2005; Rasmussen et al., 2012). There is also a personal goal component, but these goals are more multidimensional (e.g., “personal skills management”). However, these programs may not be pragmatic in highly impoverished, resource-poor areas; adding emphasis on contextual components to brief, scalable AEP prevention programs may be more feasible. AEP risk involves more than high alcohol use and low birth control use. Highly complex biological and environmental etiologies for alcohol use and addiction may necessitate longer-term comprehensive care for interventions targeting reduction or abstinence. Such comprehensive care may also be needed for participants who have not only experienced IPV or trauma, but also for participants who live in resource-scarce areas or in areas with limited alternatives for social support (e.g., highly rural or isolated areas). Although current interventions have substantially reduced AEP, consideration of mental health and maladaptive environments as barriers for behavioral change are critical for developing new or improved programs. Go to: Supplementary Material Supp TableS1 Click here to view.(23K, docx) Supp TableS2 Click here to view.(16K, docx) Supp TableS3 Click here to view.(19K, docx) Go to: Acknowledgements: Funding for this study was provided by P20 GM121341–01. This research uses data from Add Health, a program project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris and designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for assistance in the original design. Information on how to obtain the Add Health data files is available on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth). No direct support was received from grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis. Go to: Footnotes 1This variable was a composite of psychological (threatening) and physical (pushing, shoving, throwing something that can hurt) items, which we included as a physical item. 2An additional category splitting apart moderate and heavy drinkers (e.g., drinking at least three days a week) was initially included in the model. However, due to similarly small cell sizes of this category (n=78, 2.65%) the moderate and high categories were combined. Estimations that include both the non-past year drinking and heavy drinking categories are available upon request. 3This includes individuals who reported five total relationships or more than five relationships 4A small percentage of individuals reported that their first relationship in the past five years started earlier than their reported age at WII (n=37). A small number of individuals also reported that their first pregnancy with their first partner from the past five years was prior to their age at WII (n=38). 5For correlation purposes, we used a continuous drinking frequency variable. However, for the dummy variables, 44.68% of participants reported total abstention or no past year drinking, 35.31% reported infrequent drinking, and 20% reported moderate to heavy drinking.
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be inverse.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'Not applicable', or 'independent'.
The isCausal field can only be either 'True' or 'False', and can only be true if the text directly states that the relationship is a causal relationship.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}, "IsCausal": {"title": "Iscausal", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification", "IsCausal"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 7 relations:
IPV -> AEP
Adolescent alcohol use -> AEP
Between-person birth control use -> AEP
IPV -> Contraceptive use
Birth control within a relationship -> AEP
Consistent birth control use over a 5-year period or more -> AEP
IPV -> Birth control
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be inverse.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'not applicable', or 'uncorrelated'.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 8 relations:
Cognitive distraction -> Rumination
Forced-failure stress -> Sadness
Rumination -> Sadness
Forced-failure stress -> RSA withdrawal
Rumination Induction -> RSAwithdrawal
Induced distraction -> RSAwithdrawal
Forced-failure stress -> RSAwithdrawal
MDD -> Cardiovascular disease
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. Correlations are also observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma, all of which impact substance use patterns and disparities within these communities. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be inverse.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'not applicable', or 'uncorrelated'.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 13 relations:
AI/AN status -> Substance-related mortality
AI/AN status -> Alcohol-related deaths
AI/AN status -> Chronic liver disease
AI/AN status -> Drug-related issues
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use initiation
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use rates
AI/AN adolescents -> Living on reservations
AI/AN adolescents -> Dropped out of school
AI/AN adults who drink -> Heavy, episodic drinking patterns
AI/AN communities -> Substance availability
AI/AN communities -> Trauma exposure
AI/AN communities -> Family and peer networks
AI/AN communities -> Historical trauma
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
Abstract Background: Pre-conceptual prevention programs geared towards reducing alcohol-exposed pregnancy (AEP) typically emphasize behavioral change of alcohol use and birth control exclusively, but rarely consider other important AEP predictors that may affect behavioral change. Intimate partner violence (IPV) substantially relates to AEP and to AEP predictors, however, few studies have tested if IPV is a unique indicator of prospective AEP risk, as both a main effect and a contextual influence on alcohol use or birth control. Methods: Using Waves II and III of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health), multilevel logistic regression models were estimated, in which IPV and birth control (both within-person and between-person) and adolescent alcohol use (between-person only) were examined as unique predictors of AEP compared to both non-pregnancy and non-AEP outcomes over up-to-5 sexual relationships. Interactions between within-person and between-person IPV, and birth control or alcohol use were also tested. Results: Within-person and between-person IPV significantly related to higher odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy and non-AEP. Adolescent alcohol use had similarly increased odds for AEP when compared to non-pregnancy or non-AEP outcomes. Only between-person birth control use related to higher odds for AEP compared to non-pregnancy and non-AEP. Between-person IPV also moderated adolescent alcohol use on odds of AEP, such that infrequent adolescent drinkers had higher odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy or non-AEP if they experienced IPV over their relationships. Conclusions: IPV is a substantial predictor for AEP as both a direct influence within relationships (within-person) and between individuals (between-person). Intervention and prevention programs focused on reducing AEP may benefit from including IPV-specific curricula. Approximately 10% of women in the United States consume alcohol while pregnant (Popova et al., 2017). Consequently, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder is one of the most common birth defects in the U.S., with rates ranging from 0.1 per 1000 to 100 per 1000 births, depending upon measurement (May et al., 2009; May et al., 2018). Although there is considerable attention and effort devoted to alcohol use cessation in pregnancy (Chang, 2009; Mengel et al., 2006; Nilsen, 2009), a large proportion of AEP involves drinking prior to learning of pregnancy status (McCormack et al., 2017). Thus, many prevention programs focus on reducing AEP prior to pregnancy through decreasing alcohol use and increasing pregnancy preventative measures (e.g., Floyd et al., 1999). These programs demonstrate moderate success, however, they often fail to address overarching contexts that can facilitate and maintain these behaviors, which may make behaviors harder to change. Intimate partner violence (IPV) is a particularly important risk factor for AEP, as well as a risk factor for alcohol and birth control use. The current study examines the link between IPV and AEP from a prospective, preconceptual lens, while controlling for other preconceptual AEP risk behaviors, testing the potential importance of including IPV as an AEP risk factor to address in preconceptual AEP prevention programs. Go to: Links between IPV and AEP IPV strongly associates with AEP (Anderson et al., 2014; Kitsantas et al., 2015; Li et al., 2012; Skagerstrom et al., 2011). A main reason for this may be that IPV victimization is both a precedent of alcohol use (Capaldi et al., 2012; Foran & O’Leary, 2008) and an antecedent (Devries et al., 2014; Derrik & Testa, 2017; Simmons et al., 2015). IPV also relates to lower levels of contraceptive use (Bergman & Stockman, 2015; Deutsch, in press; Maxwell et al., 2015). Consequently, unintended pregnancy, another predictor of AEP (McDonald et al., 2014), is also associated with IPV (Miller et al., 2010; Pallitto et al., v 2005). Underlying mechanisms for the association between IPV and AEP are unclear. Most research examining this association is descriptive. However, associations between IPV and alcohol use can be explained by broader relationship conflict (e.g., Collibee & Furman, 2018; Eckhard et al., 2015; Leonard & Quigley, 1999) and personal coping strategies (e.g., Schumacher et al., 2008; Ivory & Kambouropoulos, 2012; Leonard & Eiden, 2007). Given that IPV can continue during pregnancy, or that pregnancy can contribute to new instances of IPV (James et al., 2013), pregnancy may not be a sufficient deterrent for reducing alcohol use, if underlying IPV-related shared variables strongly maintain levels of alcohol use. Additionally, substance use coercion is a form of IPV itself (Rivera et al., 2015; Warshaw et al., 2014). Thus, alcohol misuse, even within pregnancy, can be maintained in part by their IPV perpetrating partners. There are also underlying mechanisms explaining the association between IPV and lower birth control use. IPV-related lower birth control is associated with coercive control motives within a relationship (Tanha et al., 2010). Reproductive coercion, in which individuals gain power over their partners by removing their partners’ reproductive agency, relates to other forms of IPV (Katz et al., 2017). Pregnancy coercion, another form of IPV reproductive control, can also explain higher rates of unintended pregnancies in IPV-marked relationships (Miller et al., 2010). Although some research indicates that AEP is more prominent in older women (e.g., Harrison & Sidebottom, 2009), pathways between alcohol use, IPV, and low birth control use start in adolescence, (Roberts et al., 2005; Silverman et al., 2001; Teitelman et al., 2008). Therefore, the association between these variables has a strong developmental context and may require addressing underlying long-standing cognitive schemas or behavioral habits. Taken together, IPV, alcohol use, low levels of contraception, unintended pregnancy, and AEP may form long-term patterns of association with one another. However, more research is required to understand the genuine ways in which IPV functions as a potential AEP risk factor. It may be important to see if IPV strengthens other AEP risk factors, given the cyclic association between risk variables. In addition, although most studies examining AEP predictors only compare AEP to women who do not drink during pregnancy (e.g., Anderson et al., 2014; Kisantas et al., 2015) this does not accurately inform preconceptual prevention programs, which emphasize both reducing alcohol use and overall pregnancy. Prospective research that can compare AEP predictors to outcomes that are more favorable than AEP (non-pregnancy and non-drinking pregnancy) may provide insight for prevention programs. Go to: Pre-conceptual AEP prevention programs The most common format of AEP prevention programs are brief interventions emphasizing motivated behavioral change (e.g., Ceperich & Ingersoll, 2011 Floyd et al., 2007; Ingersoll et al., 2013). Interventions can include motivational interview counseling, assessment feedback, and contraception counseling (Velasquez et al., 2013), although there are also self-guided formats (e.g., Tenkku et al., 2011). Reduced drinking and increased birth control use is guided by a process of self-evaluation and developing plans of change for levels of alcohol use and birth control use (Floyd et al., 2007; Velasquez et al., 2010). The brevity of these programs makes it scalable and easy to implement without requiring a large number of resources, which can be crucial in resource-poor, in-need populations. Success of preconceptual AEP prevention programs is typically defined as either post-program decrease in alcohol use and/or an increase in birth control. These programs do achieve both of these aims (Floyd et al., 2007; Hutton et al., 2014), but have more success in increasing birth control than reducing alcohol use (e.g., Farrell-Caranhan, et al., 2013; Hanson et al., 2017; Wilton, et al., 2013). In other words, programs are more successful at reducing the number of overall potential pregnancies potentially exposed to alcohol, compared to reducing the amount of alcohol consumed that may affect the remaining pregnancies. One potential reason for this may be that these programs tend to focus exclusively on individual-level behavioral change, and do not necessarily account for environments that may provide substantial barriers for change. For example, women in relationships marked by IPV may have a more difficult time either trying to reduce alcohol misuse (e.g., out of a higher need for immediate coping) or trying to obtain birth control (out of fear of partner reactions or even due to active resistance from the partner; de Bocanegra et al., 2010). Go to: Current Study The purpose of this study is to explore ways in which IPV may serve as a risk factor for AEP. Although IPV is a known predictor of AEP, it will be important to know if IPV has contextual, moderating influences on other AEP predictors, particularly those emphasized as risk factors in preconceptual prevention programs. As the goals of preconceptual AEP prevention programs are to 1) reduce the number of pregnancies by increasing contraceptive use, and 2) reduce AEP by reducing alcohol use within pregnancies, we compared three outcomes: AEP, non-pregnancy, and no-alcohol-exposed pregnancy (nAEP.) Specifically, we wanted to know if IPV was a unique risk factor for AEP, controlling for birth control use and alcohol use. Utilizing a multi-level, longitudinal design, we were able to examine if IPV was a unique risk factor a) within people, over relationships, and b) between individuals. We hypothesized that within relationships, IPV would relate to higher odds of AEP. In addition, those who reported experiencing higher levels of IPV averaged over all relationships would have higher odds of AEP compared to those who reported lower or no levels of IPV averaged over all relationships. We also hypothesized the effects of birth control use and alcohol use would be similar to prior research. Higher alcohol use would relate to higher odds of AEP, and that higher birth control use would relate to lower odds of AEP (although perhaps only when comparing AEP to non-pregnancy). We also examined IPV as a potential moderating context. As IPV relates to both higher alcohol use and lower birth control, it is possible that IPV strengthens alcohol use and birth control effects on the odds of AEP. Therefore, we hypothesized that IPV would strengthen the positive effect that alcohol use has on the odds of AEP, and would strengthen the negative effect that birth control use has on the odds of AEP. We included controls of childhood abuse and adolescent intimate partner violence, as well as time-varying contextual variables of the age at the start of relationship and relationship duration. Childhood abuse was included as it is a predictor of AEP (Frankenberger et al., 2015; Whitfield et al., 2003), intimate partner violence victimization (Renner & Slack, 2006) and alcohol use and abuse in adolescence and adulthood (e.g., Dube et al., 2002; Shin et al., 2009). Adolescent intimate partner violence was also included due to relationships between adolescent and young adult re-victimization (Gomez, 2011). Go to: Method Participants Participants were from Wave 2 (WII) and 3 (WIII) of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health). A nationally-representative U.S. sample was first assessed at grades 7 – 12 in 1994–95 (WI), and then followed up in 1996 (WII), 2000–2001 (WIII) and 2004–2005 (Wave 4). Women who completed WII and WIII, reported more than one WIII romantic relationship, and reported alcohol onset by WIII were included in the present analyses. The final sample included 3460 observations for 2097 participants. Measures Adult (WIII) Pregnancy status. Pregnancy status was a three-category variable indicating non-pregnancy (0) nAEP (1) or AEP pregnancy (2) within each romantic relationship. Participants were asked detailed questions about each completed/current pregnancy, and each pregnancy was linked to a reported romantic/sexual relationship. AEP was specifically assessed by the question “During this pregnancy, how often did you drink alcoholic beverages?” for each pregnancy. Options ranged from 0 (never) to 4 (almost every day). This was collapsed to a binary AEP/non-AEP variable. Multiple pregnancies within a single relationship were aggregated. The non-AEP pregnancy code indicated no alcohol exposure for all reported pregnancies within that romantic/sexual relationship. An AEP pregnancy code indicated at least 1 alcohol-exposed pregnancy for all pregnancies within the specific romantic/sexual relationship. Adult (WIII) Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) Victimization. Respondents were asked about having had experienced physical IPV by every sexual partner they reported in WIII. This measure was adapted from the revised Conflicts and Tactics Scale (CTS2; Straus et al., 1996). Physical IPV was measured by asking how often one’s partner a) “has threatened you with violence, pushed or shoved you, or thrown something at you that could hurt”1, b) “has slapped, hit, or kicked you” or if “you had an injury such as a sprain, bruise, or cut because of a fight with (partner). Items were initially measured using a 7 point scale, from 0 (never) to 6 (more than 20 times), with an extra item for indicating that “this hasn’t happened in the past year, but did happen before then”. Items were re-coded with a binary absence/presence for the prevalence of each indicator of physical IPV (see Straus, 2004). The final score was the sum score for the three items. Adult (WIII) Consistent Birth Control Use: Participants were asked about their use of condoms and birth control for every sexual relationship that they reported in WIII. For every partner, individuals were asked if they had (vaginal) sex on one or more than one occasion. Those who reported having had sex only one time with each specific partner were asked if they had used any birth control, and for those that reported use, what birth control was used (respondents could choose up to three methods). Those who reported having had sex more than one time with each specific partner were asked if they used any birth control/what types of birth control for the first and most recent time they had sex. Individuals were coded as having had consistent birth control use if they reported using any effective birth control (condom, birth control pills, vaginal sponge, foam/jelly, diaphragm, IUD, Norplant, ring, Depo Provera or contraceptive film) for their only or both first and most recent times having had sex. Although the different birth control methods within the consistent birth control group may have varying levels of efficacy/failure (e.g., Kost et al., 2008), we chose to group these together due to the small sample sizes of methods other than condom use and hormonal birth control. Those who reported no birth control use at any time, either first or most recent times or those who reported using only withdrawal or the rhythm method for their BC were coded as having inconsistent birth control use. Adolescent (WII) IPV victimization was derived from a measure assessing WII reports of up to six sexual/romantic partners (up to three romantic and three non-romantic) they had in the past year (since the last interview at WI). Similar to the WIII measure, participants were asked if their partner(s) had ever threatened them with violence, pushed or shoved the participant or thrown something at the participant that could hurt them. However, these were assessed as binary, not frequency variables. These items were summed for each partner and then averaged across partners. Adolescent (WII) Alcohol Use Frequency. Alcohol use in adolescence was assessed via a past-year frequency variable at WII. This score was initially re-coded with dummy variables to account for abstainers, however, non-abstaining individuals who reported no past year use were also included in this category, as this was a small proportion of individuals (n = 77, 2.61%), and such models performed poorly when examining interactions, most likely due to small cell sizes. Therefore, there were two dummy codes reflecting three categories: abstainers/non-abstaining non-users, infrequent drinkers (those who reported drinking once a month or less), and moderate-to-high drinkers, who reported drinking at least two times a month.2 Control Variables. Two variables were included to contextualize the WIII time-varying romantic relationships. Length of each sexual relationship was calculated by subtracting the reported start and end dates (past relationship) or by subtracting the start and the interview date (current relationship). This variable was re-coded into an eight-point scale, ranging from 1 day (0) to more than 4 years (7). Age at start of each relationship was assessed by subtracting participants’ birth date from the reported start date of the relationship. Total number of adolescent (WII) relationships was added as a control for the WII physical violence victimization variable, to distinguish meaning between those who reported either no physically violent relationships or no relationships (both of which would result in scores of 0). This was assessed by counting the number of romantic relationship partners endorsed in the WII relationship measure. Childhood abuse was conceptualized as mistreatment by parents or adult caregivers prior to 6th grade (measured in WIII). Participants reported how often adults (parents or other adult caregivers) had slapped, hit, or kicked them, and how often they had “touched you in a sexual way, forced you to touch him or her in a sexual way, or forced you to have sexual relations”. Reporting physical or sexual abuse was coded with a “1” while reporting no physical or sexual abuse was coded with a “0”. Finally, age at WII was included to contextualize the adolescent alcohol use (e.g., contextualize differences between a 13-year-old drinker versus an 18-year-old drinker). Go to: Analytic Plan A generalized multi-level model nesting relationship within person-level effects compared pregnancy outcomes (AEP versus nAEP or non-pregnancy). This included four relationship-varying effects: IPV, consistent birth control use, age at the start of relationship, and length of relationship. Adolescent alcohol use frequency, IPV/relationship ratio, and the number of romantic partners, along with child abuse and race were considered non-relationship varying (between-person) variables. A main model was first estimated, as well as four models that examined two-way interactions between IPV and either birth control use, or adolescent alcohol use. Two IPV × adolescent alcohol use interactions were estimated: a cross-level within-person IPV × between-person alcohol use interaction, and a between-person IPV × between-person alcohol use interaction. For interactions between IPV and birth control use, there were four possibilities to explore: two cross-level interactions (a within-person IPV × between-person birth control interaction, and a within-person birth control and between-person IPV interaction), and two single-level interactions (within-person or between person only interactions). Only the first five relationships were included in this model due to low numbers in both the number of reported relationships after 5, as well as the number of reported relationships after 5 that also included pregnancies. Although individuals reported up to 48 relationships, 81.87% participants reported 1 – 5 relationships and 91.06% of relationships with pregnancy outcomes were reported for relationships 1 – 5. Person-means centering was used to assess the direct effects of within-person and between-person effects (Curran & Bauer, 2011) for IPV, age at the start of relationship, and length of relationship. A grand-means centered approach was used for the birth control variable (person-means centering is not advisable for binary variables). All models were estimated using Mplus TWOLEVEL COMPLEX function, which accounts for the stratified sampling and complex survey weights, and a robust maximum likelihood estimator to account for missingness of data. Go to: Results Total number of relationships reported were: 2 relationships (26.51%), 3 relationships (21.16%), 4 relationships (16.27%) and 5+ relationships (36.06%3). Table 1 presents the correlations and means/frequencies for all variables. Table 1. Correlations and means/frequencies of all variables across all relationships 1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11	12 1. Total Pregnancies	-											 2. Total AEP (for pregnancies only)	0.20**	-										 3. Average IPV Victimization Across Relationships	0.27**	0.13*	-									 4. Average Consistent BC Use Across Relationships	−0.29**	−0.11**	−0.17**	-								 5. Average Age at Start of relationship(s)	−0.08**	0.02	−0.04*	0.08**	-							 6. Average Length of Relationship(s)	0.24**	−0.10**	0.14**	−0.14**	−0.16**	-						 7. Adolescent Frequency of Drinking	0.11**	0.16**	0.10**	−0.04*	−0.01	0.06**	-					 8. Adolescent Physical IPV	0.15**	0.05	0.16**	−0.06**	−0.01	0.08**	0.10**	-				 9. Adolescent Total Sexual/Romantic Partners	0.05**	0.01	0.06**	−0.01	−0.15	0.02	0.18**	0.09**	-			 10. Child Abuse	0.05**	0.11**	0.12**	−0.08**	−0.03	−0.01	0.04	0.01	0.03	-		 11. Race	0.08**	0.04	0.03	−0.10**	0.06**	0.04*	−.07**	0.01-	0.04**	0.11**	-	 12. Age	0.14**	0.02	0.05**	−0.01	0.51**	0.19**	.20**	0.11**	0.14**	0.01	0.08**	-  Mean (SD) [Range] / Frequency												 0: 63.22% 1: 27.55% 2: 8.32% 3 – 9: 0.91%	0: 84.97 % 1: 13.20 % 2 – 3: 1.83%	0.62 (1.06) [0 – 6]	0.61 (0.37) [0 – 1]	19.06 (1.76) [15 – 26]	3.42 (1.64) [0 – 7]	1.48 (1.43)5	0.11 (0.39) [0 – 3]	0.91 (0.95) [0 – 5]	0.32 (0.47)	W: 56.59% B: 20.56% L: 15.01% A:6.26% AIAN:1.58%	16.08 (1.56) Open in a separate window *p<.05; **p<.01 Multilevel Models Multilevel models were first tested to see if random slopes were necessary in addition to a random intercept. There was no improvement in model fit when adding a random slope of time (Δχ2 (4) = 2.95, p>.05), or a random slope of IPV, (Δχ2 (2) =0.32, p>.05). Although adding a random slope of within-person birth control use significantly improved the model (Δχ2 (2) = 16.42, p<.05), this model did not converge when adding a subsequent cross-level interaction involving within-person IPV. Therefore, all models were estimated with random intercepts and fixed effects, except when estimating cross-level interactions. Intraclass correlation coefficients were also examined; both the non-pregnancy vs AEP group (ICC = 0.43) and the nAEP vs AEP group (ICC=0.60) had reasonable between-person variability. Within and between-person main effects of physical IPV, birth control use, and adolescent alcohol use on AEP Table 2 displays the main effects using either non-pregnancy or nAEP as the reference group. As indicated, there were within-person (relationship-specific) effects. For every increase in presence of a specific physical IPV indicator within a relationship, compared to other relationships, odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy increased by 164%. Similarly, there was a 1.36 higher odds of AEP compared to nAEP, in relationships with increased IPV indicators compared to other relationships. There were no within-person significant effects for birth control use. In other words, using birth control consistently within a relationship, compared to other relationships, did not significantly increase the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy or nAEP outcomes. Table 2. Multi-level model parameters for odd ratios of AEP compared to reference variables non-pregnancy and nAEP AEP (vs non-pregnancy)	AEP (vs nAEP) Level 1			 Within-person Physical IPV	1.64** (1.27 – 2.12)	1.36* (1.08 – 1.72) Within-person Consistent Birth Control Use	0.50 (0.27 – 0.91)	1.71 (0.96 – 3.07) Within-person Length of Relationship	1.14* (1.04 – 1.25)	0.88* (0.80 – 0.97) Within-person Age at Start of Relationship	0.98 (0.90 – 1.05)	1.05 (0.97 – 1.13) Level 2			 Between-person Physical IPV	2.00** (1.68 – 2.38)	1.54** (1.32 – 1.81) Between-person Consistent Birth Control Use	0.34** (0.18 – 0.66)	0.38* (0.20 – 0.73) Between-person Length of Relationship	0.94 (0.83 – 1.05)	0.72** (0.64 – 0.80) Between-person Age at Start of Relationship	0.77** (0.69 – 0.86)	0.91 (0.80 – 1.04) Adolescent Infrequent Past Year Drinking (vs non/Abs.)	1.44 (0.94 – 2.18)	1.75* (1.13 – 2.70) Adolescent Moderate-Heavy Past Year Drinking (vs non/Abs.)	1.76* (1.17 – 2.66)	1.95** (1.25 – 3.05) Average IPV Experiences in Adolescent Relationships	1.68** (1.24 – 2.28)	1.23 (0.92 – 1.65) Adolescent Total Romantic/Sexual Partners	1.33** (1.11 – 1.58)	1.16 (0.95 – 1.40) Child Abuse History	1.34 (0.94 – 1.94)	1.33 (0.91 – 1.95) African American (vs White)	1.35 (0.79 – 2.32)	0.59 (0.35 – 0.98) Latino/a (vs White)	0.81 (0.46 – 1.41)	0.63 (0.36 – 1.09) Other Race (vs White)	1.01 (0.43 – 2.34)	1.13 (0.47 – 2.71) Age at WII	1.22* (1.04 – 1.43)	0.99 (0.85 – 1.15) Open in a separate window *p<.05; **p<.01 Note: AEP = “alcohol-exposed pregnancy”; IPV = “intimate partner violence”; Abs = “abstinence from alcohol There were also significant between-person effects distinguishing non-pregnancy from AEP and nAEP from AEP. For every additional physical IPV indicator experienced within the five-year span (averaged over all relationships), compared to other individuals, increased the overall odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy by 200%, and increased the overall odds of AEP compared to nAEP by 154%. Therefore, not only did IPV have within-relationship influence, but also distinguished AEP outcomes between individuals. In addition, individuals who used birth control more consistently over the 5-year period compared to other individuals decreased odds of AEP by 66% (compared to non-pregnancy) and 62% (compared to nAEP). Finally, alcohol use in adolescence increased odds of AEP. Individuals who reported past-year infrequent drinking in adolescence, compared to those who reported abstention or no past year drinking, increased odds of overall AEP compared to nAEP in adulthood by 175%. Those who reported heavy or moderate past-year drinking in adolescence, compared to those who reported abstention or no past year drinking, increased odds of AEP in adulthood by 176% (compared to no-pregnancy) or 195% (compared to nAEP). Therefore, adolescent drinking overall increased higher odds of AEP compared to either non-pregnancy or nAEP outcomes in adulthood. Interactions between IPV, adolescent alcohol use, and birth control use Between-person IPV moderated the effect of infrequent past-year adolescent alcohol use on the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy (OR = 1.49, p<.05, (95% CI (1.09 – 2.05)) and AEP compared to nAEP, (OR = 1.63, p<.05, 95% CI (1.21 – 2.19)). As seen in Figure 1a–b, the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy (1a) or nAEP (1b) were generally low. However, experiencing higher levels of physical IPV substantially increased the effect of infrequent adolescent drinking on the odds of AEP. For example, when examining the odds of AEP compared to nAEP (Figure 1b) the odds of AEP for an infrequent adolescent drinker who experienced no IPV from any romantic relationship in the past five years was 0.15. The odds of AEP for an infrequent adolescent drinker who experienced high IPV (e.g., 3 unique physical IPV indicators averaged across all romantic relationships in the past five years) was 1.03. Comparatively, the odds of AEP for moderate to heavy adolescent drinkers was 0.29 to 0.55 for those who experienced no or high IPV respectively. In other words, higher levels of average physical IPV over the five-year period significantly increased the odds of AEP for infrequent adolescent drinkers, compared to non-drinkers, however, IPV experience did not significantly increase the odds of AEP for moderate-heavy adolescent drinkers, compared to non-drinkers. There were no other significant interactions of IPV on either adolescent alcohol use or birth control use (see Supplemental Table 1a–b). An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is nihms-1008931-f0001.jpg Figure 1A-B. Level 2 IPV × adolescent past year drinking frequency interaction predicting odds of AEP vs non-pregnancy (A) and AEP vs nAEP (B) Note: IPV levels indicate average items endorsed over all relationships in past 5 years. Range of IPV is from 0 (no items) to 3 (3 items). Post Hoc Tests Alcohol use was assessed at adolescence (WII) to ensure directionality. Although alcohol use was also assessed at WIII, there was no alcohol use information that accompanied the timeline of relationships or pregnancies beyond the measure of AEP. However, given that alcohol use will most likely change over the five years between WII and WIII (e.g., a trend towards increasing in later adolescence/young adulthood; Chassin et al., 2004), we also ran models using the WIII alcohol variable. As with the main models, there were two dummy codes reflecting three categories (no past-year use, infrequent past year use, and moderate – to – high past year use). As WIII abstainers had been excluded from the study sample, the young adult no past-year use category included only those who had reported any lifetime use, but no past year use. Supplemental Table 2 displays frequency tables for comparing adolescent and young adult drinking rates. Similarly, in adolescents and young adults, non-abstaining, non-past year drinkers and heavy drinkers had the lowest categories. Supplemental Table 3a–3b displays the WIII-alcohol use variable models. Similar to the WII alcohol-use model, individuals who reported moderate/heavy alcohol use at WIII had higher odds of (previously) reporting AEP compared to nAEP; compared to non-drinkers, those who reported moderate or heavy drinking had 353% higher odds of an AEP. However, there were no other significant associations between WIII alcohol use and AEP outcomes. In addition, compared to the WII-alcohol model, there were no within-person significant effects of IPV or birth control use on distinguishing AEP from nAEP. There were significant within-person effects distinguishing AEP from non-pregnancy, similar to the WII-alcohol use model. Between-person effects for IPV and birth control were similar to the WII-alcohol use model. There were also no significant interactions. Go to: Discussion The purpose of this study was to examine the role of physical IPV as a risk factor for AEP as a unique predictor and a potential moderator of the two main behaviors emphasized in preconceptional AEP prevention programs: alcohol use and birth control. We found that IPV was a strong influence on AEP both within specific relationships and between people. IPV had little moderating influence on AEP outcomes; the one significant interaction highlights the contexts in which IPV may strengthen the history of (adolescent) alcohol use on later AEP. Intimate partner violence as a main effect As hypothesized, IPV related to higher odds of AEP, alongside higher alcohol use and lower birth control use. Individuals experiencing higher physical IPV within the 5–year period, compared to individuals who experienced less physical IPV, had higher odds of reporting any AEP outcome. This is consistent with studies comparing pregnant women who do or do not abstain from alcohol use (e.g., Kitsantas et al., 2015; McDonald et al., 2014; Powers et al., 2013). Experiencing IPV also had a direct influence on AEP compared to non-pregnancy and nAEP as a within-person (within-relationship) effect. Given the variety of ways in which physical IPV related to AEP, multiple explanations are needed. The association between IPV and unintended pregnancy, typically via lower associated levels of birth control (Miller et al., 2010; Pallitto et al., 2005) could explain within-person effects of IPV. Physical IPV (as measured here), is often accompanied by other forms of IPV that can further facilitate pregnancy, such as sexual IPV or reproductive coercion (Katz et al., 2017; Tanha et al., 2010). Another contributing explanation, pertaining to the within-person effect of IPV on AEP versus nAEP, may be the continued or even new experiences of IPV during pregnancy. There are less reported instances of IPV during pregnancy compared to non-pregnancy (e.g., Silverman, et al., 2006), however relationships marked by IPV can continue into pregnancy (James et al., 2013), and such IPV tends to increase in severity during pregnancy (Brownridge, et al., 2011). Substance use can increase during this time (Martin et al., 2003), if used as a coping mechanism. Between-person IPV effects indicate additional third variable explanations for the association between physical IPV and AEP vs nAEP. Variables related to both AEP and IPV include anxiety (Alvik et al., 2006; Pico-Alfonso, et al., 2006) and illicit drug use (Anderson et al., 2012; Harrisson & Sidebottom, 2009). Third variable explanations may also include pervasive forms of IPV such as coercive control, psychological/emotional violence, or even substance use coercion itself (Rivera et al., 2015; Warshaw et al., 2014). These types of IPV result in negative health outcomes such as substance use or lower birth control that are as strong as, or stronger than physical IPV effects (e.g., Ansara & Hindin, 2010; Coker et al., 2002). Most research examining the relationship between IPV and AEP either do not classify IPV typology (Anderson et al., 2014), only assess physical IPV (Kisantas et al., 2015), or aggregate IPV forms (McDonald et al., 2014). Roberts et al., (2014) documented that, within women seeking services for pregnancy termination, psychological IPV did not predict AEP when controlling for physical IPV. However it is unknown if these results generalize to other pregnancy/preconceptual situations. Intimate partner violence as a moderator Contrary to hypotheses, IPV was not a prominent moderator for alcohol use or birth control. Infrequent drinking in adolescence, compared to abstinence / no past year drinking, related to increased odds of AEP in young adulthood for those experiencing more IPV. This interaction highlights the way that IPV, or related third-variable contexts, can increase AEP vulnerability for women with a history of lower-level adolescent drinking. The strong association between earlier high drinking trajectories and alcohol use disorders (Deutsch et al., 2017, Hingson et al., 2006) may explain the lack of interaction between IPV and higher levels of adolescent drinking. For heavier adolescent drinkers, alcohol cessation during pregnancy may be more difficult regardless of external environment (e.g., IPV experience). However, IPV contexts may potentially reinforce drinking for individuals with a history of lower level alcohol use; individuals who otherwise may be more likely to stop drinking during pregnancy (Anderson et al., 2014; Okeefe et al., 2015). Birth control effects were not strengthened by IPV. We expected that there might be an interaction due to the strong relationship between IPV and birth control use (Tanaha et al., 2010) and IPV and unintended pregnancy (Miller et al., 2010). It is possible that other IPV forms more related to birth control use (e.g., coercive control) would strengthen birth control use effects. Alternatively, interactions between IPV and birth control use may be more relevant for unintended pregnancy, compared to AEP outcomes. Given the strong relationship between unintended pregnancy and AEP (e.g., McDonald et al., 2014), it may be beneficial to examine a mediating relationship between IPV/birth control, unintended pregnancy, and AEP. Intimate Partner Violence as an indicator of AEP risk for intervention programs The current findings support the notion that IPV, and other (third-variable) predictors that may relate to both AEP and substance use, may warrant special attention in AEP prevention curricula, as IPV related to declines in both outcomes preferred over AEP: non-pregnancy and nAEP. Most preconceptual short-term AEP interventions demonstrate improvement in birth control use (e.g., Hanson et al., 2017; Ingersoll et al., 2013, 2018, Wilton et al., 2013), indicating AEP prevention through these programs is mostly due to non-pregnancy outcomes. Variables contributing to maintenance of alcohol use, or contexts in which substance use and low birth control use are part of a larger system of lack of control or autonomy, might need emphasis outside of the personal feedback, motivational interview, or self-guided behavioral change formats, particularly for women who become pregnant. Strengths and Limitations The longitudinal, prospective data is a strength of the study, allowing us to examine change within individuals (between relationships). We also compared AEP to both favorable outcomes for preconceptual AEP prevention programs: non-pregnancy and nAEP. Prior studies typically only compare AEP and nAEP (pregnancy samples; Anderson et al., 2012; Frankenberger et al., 2015; Skagerstrom et al., 2013). A main limitation is the lack of other important within-relationship variables, particularly alcohol use. Time between adolescent alcohol use and each relationship was up to five years (average time difference between WII age and mean age at relationship start [across all relationships] was 2.74 (SD = 1.67), average time difference between WII age and mean age at due date [across all pregnancies] was 3.42 (SD = 1.82)4. Although Add Health includes both WII and WIII past year alcohol use, we used WII to ensure directionality. Another potential issue was the sample age, as women who drink while pregnant tend to skew older (e.g., Meschke et al., 2013) than the youngest sample participants. It is also possible that participants did not recognize their alcohol consumption during pregnancy. Retrospective reports for alcohol use are potentially less valid than prospective reports, although AEP may be more under-reported within prospective studies (Alvik et al., 2006). Finally, we only examined physical IPV. Including other types of IPV (e.g., psychological, emotional, coercive control) could have produced different results. Implications and Future Directions It should be noted that longer-term, case-management style AEP interventions, in which participants connect to a variety of services, improve both birth control use and alcohol use behavior (e.g., Grant et al., 2005; Rasmussen et al., 2012). There is also a personal goal component, but these goals are more multidimensional (e.g., “personal skills management”). However, these programs may not be pragmatic in highly impoverished, resource-poor areas; adding emphasis on contextual components to brief, scalable AEP prevention programs may be more feasible. AEP risk involves more than high alcohol use and low birth control use. Highly complex biological and environmental etiologies for alcohol use and addiction may necessitate longer-term comprehensive care for interventions targeting reduction or abstinence. Such comprehensive care may also be needed for participants who have not only experienced IPV or trauma, but also for participants who live in resource-scarce areas or in areas with limited alternatives for social support (e.g., highly rural or isolated areas). Although current interventions have substantially reduced AEP, consideration of mental health and maladaptive environments as barriers for behavioral change are critical for developing new or improved programs. Go to: Supplementary Material Supp TableS1 Click here to view.(23K, docx) Supp TableS2 Click here to view.(16K, docx) Supp TableS3 Click here to view.(19K, docx) Go to: Acknowledgements: Funding for this study was provided by P20 GM121341–01. This research uses data from Add Health, a program project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris and designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for assistance in the original design. Information on how to obtain the Add Health data files is available on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth). No direct support was received from grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis. Go to: Footnotes 1This variable was a composite of psychological (threatening) and physical (pushing, shoving, throwing something that can hurt) items, which we included as a physical item. 2An additional category splitting apart moderate and heavy drinkers (e.g., drinking at least three days a week) was initially included in the model. However, due to similarly small cell sizes of this category (n=78, 2.65%) the moderate and high categories were combined. Estimations that include both the non-past year drinking and heavy drinking categories are available upon request. 3This includes individuals who reported five total relationships or more than five relationships 4A small percentage of individuals reported that their first relationship in the past five years started earlier than their reported age at WII (n=37). A small number of individuals also reported that their first pregnancy with their first partner from the past five years was prior to their age at WII (n=38). 5For correlation purposes, we used a continuous drinking frequency variable. However, for the dummy variables, 44.68% of participants reported total abstention or no past year drinking, 35.31% reported infrequent drinking, and 20% reported moderate to heavy drinking.
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be inverse.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'not applicable', or 'uncorrelated'.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 7 relations:
IPV -> AEP
Adolescent alcohol use -> AEP
Between-person birth control use -> AEP
IPV -> Contraceptive use
Birth control within a relationship -> AEP
Consistent birth control use over a 5-year period or more -> AEP
IPV -> Birth control
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be inverse.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'not applicable', or 'uncorrelated'.
Direct means that an increase in one would cause a decrease in another, and inverse means that an increase in one would cause a decreaset in another.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 8 relations:
Cognitive distraction -> Rumination
Forced-failure stress -> Sadness
Rumination -> Sadness
Forced-failure stress -> RSA withdrawal
Rumination Induction -> RSAwithdrawal
Induced distraction -> RSAwithdrawal
Forced-failure stress -> RSAwithdrawal
MDD -> Cardiovascular disease
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. Correlations are also observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma, all of which impact substance use patterns and disparities within these communities. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be inverse.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'not applicable', or 'uncorrelated'.
Direct means that an increase in one would cause a decrease in another, and inverse means that an increase in one would cause a decreaset in another.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 13 relations:
AI/AN status -> Substance-related mortality
AI/AN status -> Alcohol-related deaths
AI/AN status -> Chronic liver disease
AI/AN status -> Drug-related issues
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use initiation
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use rates
AI/AN adolescents -> Living on reservations
AI/AN adolescents -> Dropped out of school
AI/AN adults who drink -> Heavy, episodic drinking patterns
AI/AN communities -> Substance availability
AI/AN communities -> Trauma exposure
AI/AN communities -> Family and peer networks
AI/AN communities -> Historical trauma
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:

START TEXT
Abstract Background: Pre-conceptual prevention programs geared towards reducing alcohol-exposed pregnancy (AEP) typically emphasize behavioral change of alcohol use and birth control exclusively, but rarely consider other important AEP predictors that may affect behavioral change. Intimate partner violence (IPV) substantially relates to AEP and to AEP predictors, however, few studies have tested if IPV is a unique indicator of prospective AEP risk, as both a main effect and a contextual influence on alcohol use or birth control. Methods: Using Waves II and III of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health), multilevel logistic regression models were estimated, in which IPV and birth control (both within-person and between-person) and adolescent alcohol use (between-person only) were examined as unique predictors of AEP compared to both non-pregnancy and non-AEP outcomes over up-to-5 sexual relationships. Interactions between within-person and between-person IPV, and birth control or alcohol use were also tested. Results: Within-person and between-person IPV significantly related to higher odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy and non-AEP. Adolescent alcohol use had similarly increased odds for AEP when compared to non-pregnancy or non-AEP outcomes. Only between-person birth control use related to higher odds for AEP compared to non-pregnancy and non-AEP. Between-person IPV also moderated adolescent alcohol use on odds of AEP, such that infrequent adolescent drinkers had higher odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy or non-AEP if they experienced IPV over their relationships. Conclusions: IPV is a substantial predictor for AEP as both a direct influence within relationships (within-person) and between individuals (between-person). Intervention and prevention programs focused on reducing AEP may benefit from including IPV-specific curricula. Approximately 10% of women in the United States consume alcohol while pregnant (Popova et al., 2017). Consequently, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder is one of the most common birth defects in the U.S., with rates ranging from 0.1 per 1000 to 100 per 1000 births, depending upon measurement (May et al., 2009; May et al., 2018). Although there is considerable attention and effort devoted to alcohol use cessation in pregnancy (Chang, 2009; Mengel et al., 2006; Nilsen, 2009), a large proportion of AEP involves drinking prior to learning of pregnancy status (McCormack et al., 2017). Thus, many prevention programs focus on reducing AEP prior to pregnancy through decreasing alcohol use and increasing pregnancy preventative measures (e.g., Floyd et al., 1999). These programs demonstrate moderate success, however, they often fail to address overarching contexts that can facilitate and maintain these behaviors, which may make behaviors harder to change. Intimate partner violence (IPV) is a particularly important risk factor for AEP, as well as a risk factor for alcohol and birth control use. The current study examines the link between IPV and AEP from a prospective, preconceptual lens, while controlling for other preconceptual AEP risk behaviors, testing the potential importance of including IPV as an AEP risk factor to address in preconceptual AEP prevention programs. Go to: Links between IPV and AEP IPV strongly associates with AEP (Anderson et al., 2014; Kitsantas et al., 2015; Li et al., 2012; Skagerstrom et al., 2011). A main reason for this may be that IPV victimization is both a precedent of alcohol use (Capaldi et al., 2012; Foran & O’Leary, 2008) and an antecedent (Devries et al., 2014; Derrik & Testa, 2017; Simmons et al., 2015). IPV also relates to lower levels of contraceptive use (Bergman & Stockman, 2015; Deutsch, in press; Maxwell et al., 2015). Consequently, unintended pregnancy, another predictor of AEP (McDonald et al., 2014), is also associated with IPV (Miller et al., 2010; Pallitto et al., v 2005). Underlying mechanisms for the association between IPV and AEP are unclear. Most research examining this association is descriptive. However, associations between IPV and alcohol use can be explained by broader relationship conflict (e.g., Collibee & Furman, 2018; Eckhard et al., 2015; Leonard & Quigley, 1999) and personal coping strategies (e.g., Schumacher et al., 2008; Ivory & Kambouropoulos, 2012; Leonard & Eiden, 2007). Given that IPV can continue during pregnancy, or that pregnancy can contribute to new instances of IPV (James et al., 2013), pregnancy may not be a sufficient deterrent for reducing alcohol use, if underlying IPV-related shared variables strongly maintain levels of alcohol use. Additionally, substance use coercion is a form of IPV itself (Rivera et al., 2015; Warshaw et al., 2014). Thus, alcohol misuse, even within pregnancy, can be maintained in part by their IPV perpetrating partners. There are also underlying mechanisms explaining the association between IPV and lower birth control use. IPV-related lower birth control is associated with coercive control motives within a relationship (Tanha et al., 2010). Reproductive coercion, in which individuals gain power over their partners by removing their partners’ reproductive agency, relates to other forms of IPV (Katz et al., 2017). Pregnancy coercion, another form of IPV reproductive control, can also explain higher rates of unintended pregnancies in IPV-marked relationships (Miller et al., 2010). Although some research indicates that AEP is more prominent in older women (e.g., Harrison & Sidebottom, 2009), pathways between alcohol use, IPV, and low birth control use start in adolescence, (Roberts et al., 2005; Silverman et al., 2001; Teitelman et al., 2008). Therefore, the association between these variables has a strong developmental context and may require addressing underlying long-standing cognitive schemas or behavioral habits. Taken together, IPV, alcohol use, low levels of contraception, unintended pregnancy, and AEP may form long-term patterns of association with one another. However, more research is required to understand the genuine ways in which IPV functions as a potential AEP risk factor. It may be important to see if IPV strengthens other AEP risk factors, given the cyclic association between risk variables. In addition, although most studies examining AEP predictors only compare AEP to women who do not drink during pregnancy (e.g., Anderson et al., 2014; Kisantas et al., 2015) this does not accurately inform preconceptual prevention programs, which emphasize both reducing alcohol use and overall pregnancy. Prospective research that can compare AEP predictors to outcomes that are more favorable than AEP (non-pregnancy and non-drinking pregnancy) may provide insight for prevention programs. Go to: Pre-conceptual AEP prevention programs The most common format of AEP prevention programs are brief interventions emphasizing motivated behavioral change (e.g., Ceperich & Ingersoll, 2011 Floyd et al., 2007; Ingersoll et al., 2013). Interventions can include motivational interview counseling, assessment feedback, and contraception counseling (Velasquez et al., 2013), although there are also self-guided formats (e.g., Tenkku et al., 2011). Reduced drinking and increased birth control use is guided by a process of self-evaluation and developing plans of change for levels of alcohol use and birth control use (Floyd et al., 2007; Velasquez et al., 2010). The brevity of these programs makes it scalable and easy to implement without requiring a large number of resources, which can be crucial in resource-poor, in-need populations. Success of preconceptual AEP prevention programs is typically defined as either post-program decrease in alcohol use and/or an increase in birth control. These programs do achieve both of these aims (Floyd et al., 2007; Hutton et al., 2014), but have more success in increasing birth control than reducing alcohol use (e.g., Farrell-Caranhan, et al., 2013; Hanson et al., 2017; Wilton, et al., 2013). In other words, programs are more successful at reducing the number of overall potential pregnancies potentially exposed to alcohol, compared to reducing the amount of alcohol consumed that may affect the remaining pregnancies. One potential reason for this may be that these programs tend to focus exclusively on individual-level behavioral change, and do not necessarily account for environments that may provide substantial barriers for change. For example, women in relationships marked by IPV may have a more difficult time either trying to reduce alcohol misuse (e.g., out of a higher need for immediate coping) or trying to obtain birth control (out of fear of partner reactions or even due to active resistance from the partner; de Bocanegra et al., 2010). Go to: Current Study The purpose of this study is to explore ways in which IPV may serve as a risk factor for AEP. Although IPV is a known predictor of AEP, it will be important to know if IPV has contextual, moderating influences on other AEP predictors, particularly those emphasized as risk factors in preconceptual prevention programs. As the goals of preconceptual AEP prevention programs are to 1) reduce the number of pregnancies by increasing contraceptive use, and 2) reduce AEP by reducing alcohol use within pregnancies, we compared three outcomes: AEP, non-pregnancy, and no-alcohol-exposed pregnancy (nAEP.) Specifically, we wanted to know if IPV was a unique risk factor for AEP, controlling for birth control use and alcohol use. Utilizing a multi-level, longitudinal design, we were able to examine if IPV was a unique risk factor a) within people, over relationships, and b) between individuals. We hypothesized that within relationships, IPV would relate to higher odds of AEP. In addition, those who reported experiencing higher levels of IPV averaged over all relationships would have higher odds of AEP compared to those who reported lower or no levels of IPV averaged over all relationships. We also hypothesized the effects of birth control use and alcohol use would be similar to prior research. Higher alcohol use would relate to higher odds of AEP, and that higher birth control use would relate to lower odds of AEP (although perhaps only when comparing AEP to non-pregnancy). We also examined IPV as a potential moderating context. As IPV relates to both higher alcohol use and lower birth control, it is possible that IPV strengthens alcohol use and birth control effects on the odds of AEP. Therefore, we hypothesized that IPV would strengthen the positive effect that alcohol use has on the odds of AEP, and would strengthen the negative effect that birth control use has on the odds of AEP. We included controls of childhood abuse and adolescent intimate partner violence, as well as time-varying contextual variables of the age at the start of relationship and relationship duration. Childhood abuse was included as it is a predictor of AEP (Frankenberger et al., 2015; Whitfield et al., 2003), intimate partner violence victimization (Renner & Slack, 2006) and alcohol use and abuse in adolescence and adulthood (e.g., Dube et al., 2002; Shin et al., 2009). Adolescent intimate partner violence was also included due to relationships between adolescent and young adult re-victimization (Gomez, 2011). Go to: Method Participants Participants were from Wave 2 (WII) and 3 (WIII) of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health). A nationally-representative U.S. sample was first assessed at grades 7 – 12 in 1994–95 (WI), and then followed up in 1996 (WII), 2000–2001 (WIII) and 2004–2005 (Wave 4). Women who completed WII and WIII, reported more than one WIII romantic relationship, and reported alcohol onset by WIII were included in the present analyses. The final sample included 3460 observations for 2097 participants. Measures Adult (WIII) Pregnancy status. Pregnancy status was a three-category variable indicating non-pregnancy (0) nAEP (1) or AEP pregnancy (2) within each romantic relationship. Participants were asked detailed questions about each completed/current pregnancy, and each pregnancy was linked to a reported romantic/sexual relationship. AEP was specifically assessed by the question “During this pregnancy, how often did you drink alcoholic beverages?” for each pregnancy. Options ranged from 0 (never) to 4 (almost every day). This was collapsed to a binary AEP/non-AEP variable. Multiple pregnancies within a single relationship were aggregated. The non-AEP pregnancy code indicated no alcohol exposure for all reported pregnancies within that romantic/sexual relationship. An AEP pregnancy code indicated at least 1 alcohol-exposed pregnancy for all pregnancies within the specific romantic/sexual relationship. Adult (WIII) Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) Victimization. Respondents were asked about having had experienced physical IPV by every sexual partner they reported in WIII. This measure was adapted from the revised Conflicts and Tactics Scale (CTS2; Straus et al., 1996). Physical IPV was measured by asking how often one’s partner a) “has threatened you with violence, pushed or shoved you, or thrown something at you that could hurt”1, b) “has slapped, hit, or kicked you” or if “you had an injury such as a sprain, bruise, or cut because of a fight with (partner). Items were initially measured using a 7 point scale, from 0 (never) to 6 (more than 20 times), with an extra item for indicating that “this hasn’t happened in the past year, but did happen before then”. Items were re-coded with a binary absence/presence for the prevalence of each indicator of physical IPV (see Straus, 2004). The final score was the sum score for the three items. Adult (WIII) Consistent Birth Control Use: Participants were asked about their use of condoms and birth control for every sexual relationship that they reported in WIII. For every partner, individuals were asked if they had (vaginal) sex on one or more than one occasion. Those who reported having had sex only one time with each specific partner were asked if they had used any birth control, and for those that reported use, what birth control was used (respondents could choose up to three methods). Those who reported having had sex more than one time with each specific partner were asked if they used any birth control/what types of birth control for the first and most recent time they had sex. Individuals were coded as having had consistent birth control use if they reported using any effective birth control (condom, birth control pills, vaginal sponge, foam/jelly, diaphragm, IUD, Norplant, ring, Depo Provera or contraceptive film) for their only or both first and most recent times having had sex. Although the different birth control methods within the consistent birth control group may have varying levels of efficacy/failure (e.g., Kost et al., 2008), we chose to group these together due to the small sample sizes of methods other than condom use and hormonal birth control. Those who reported no birth control use at any time, either first or most recent times or those who reported using only withdrawal or the rhythm method for their BC were coded as having inconsistent birth control use. Adolescent (WII) IPV victimization was derived from a measure assessing WII reports of up to six sexual/romantic partners (up to three romantic and three non-romantic) they had in the past year (since the last interview at WI). Similar to the WIII measure, participants were asked if their partner(s) had ever threatened them with violence, pushed or shoved the participant or thrown something at the participant that could hurt them. However, these were assessed as binary, not frequency variables. These items were summed for each partner and then averaged across partners. Adolescent (WII) Alcohol Use Frequency. Alcohol use in adolescence was assessed via a past-year frequency variable at WII. This score was initially re-coded with dummy variables to account for abstainers, however, non-abstaining individuals who reported no past year use were also included in this category, as this was a small proportion of individuals (n = 77, 2.61%), and such models performed poorly when examining interactions, most likely due to small cell sizes. Therefore, there were two dummy codes reflecting three categories: abstainers/non-abstaining non-users, infrequent drinkers (those who reported drinking once a month or less), and moderate-to-high drinkers, who reported drinking at least two times a month.2 Control Variables. Two variables were included to contextualize the WIII time-varying romantic relationships. Length of each sexual relationship was calculated by subtracting the reported start and end dates (past relationship) or by subtracting the start and the interview date (current relationship). This variable was re-coded into an eight-point scale, ranging from 1 day (0) to more than 4 years (7). Age at start of each relationship was assessed by subtracting participants’ birth date from the reported start date of the relationship. Total number of adolescent (WII) relationships was added as a control for the WII physical violence victimization variable, to distinguish meaning between those who reported either no physically violent relationships or no relationships (both of which would result in scores of 0). This was assessed by counting the number of romantic relationship partners endorsed in the WII relationship measure. Childhood abuse was conceptualized as mistreatment by parents or adult caregivers prior to 6th grade (measured in WIII). Participants reported how often adults (parents or other adult caregivers) had slapped, hit, or kicked them, and how often they had “touched you in a sexual way, forced you to touch him or her in a sexual way, or forced you to have sexual relations”. Reporting physical or sexual abuse was coded with a “1” while reporting no physical or sexual abuse was coded with a “0”. Finally, age at WII was included to contextualize the adolescent alcohol use (e.g., contextualize differences between a 13-year-old drinker versus an 18-year-old drinker). Go to: Analytic Plan A generalized multi-level model nesting relationship within person-level effects compared pregnancy outcomes (AEP versus nAEP or non-pregnancy). This included four relationship-varying effects: IPV, consistent birth control use, age at the start of relationship, and length of relationship. Adolescent alcohol use frequency, IPV/relationship ratio, and the number of romantic partners, along with child abuse and race were considered non-relationship varying (between-person) variables. A main model was first estimated, as well as four models that examined two-way interactions between IPV and either birth control use, or adolescent alcohol use. Two IPV × adolescent alcohol use interactions were estimated: a cross-level within-person IPV × between-person alcohol use interaction, and a between-person IPV × between-person alcohol use interaction. For interactions between IPV and birth control use, there were four possibilities to explore: two cross-level interactions (a within-person IPV × between-person birth control interaction, and a within-person birth control and between-person IPV interaction), and two single-level interactions (within-person or between person only interactions). Only the first five relationships were included in this model due to low numbers in both the number of reported relationships after 5, as well as the number of reported relationships after 5 that also included pregnancies. Although individuals reported up to 48 relationships, 81.87% participants reported 1 – 5 relationships and 91.06% of relationships with pregnancy outcomes were reported for relationships 1 – 5. Person-means centering was used to assess the direct effects of within-person and between-person effects (Curran & Bauer, 2011) for IPV, age at the start of relationship, and length of relationship. A grand-means centered approach was used for the birth control variable (person-means centering is not advisable for binary variables). All models were estimated using Mplus TWOLEVEL COMPLEX function, which accounts for the stratified sampling and complex survey weights, and a robust maximum likelihood estimator to account for missingness of data. Go to: Results Total number of relationships reported were: 2 relationships (26.51%), 3 relationships (21.16%), 4 relationships (16.27%) and 5+ relationships (36.06%3). Table 1 presents the correlations and means/frequencies for all variables. Table 1. Correlations and means/frequencies of all variables across all relationships 1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11	12 1. Total Pregnancies	-											 2. Total AEP (for pregnancies only)	0.20**	-										 3. Average IPV Victimization Across Relationships	0.27**	0.13*	-									 4. Average Consistent BC Use Across Relationships	−0.29**	−0.11**	−0.17**	-								 5. Average Age at Start of relationship(s)	−0.08**	0.02	−0.04*	0.08**	-							 6. Average Length of Relationship(s)	0.24**	−0.10**	0.14**	−0.14**	−0.16**	-						 7. Adolescent Frequency of Drinking	0.11**	0.16**	0.10**	−0.04*	−0.01	0.06**	-					 8. Adolescent Physical IPV	0.15**	0.05	0.16**	−0.06**	−0.01	0.08**	0.10**	-				 9. Adolescent Total Sexual/Romantic Partners	0.05**	0.01	0.06**	−0.01	−0.15	0.02	0.18**	0.09**	-			 10. Child Abuse	0.05**	0.11**	0.12**	−0.08**	−0.03	−0.01	0.04	0.01	0.03	-		 11. Race	0.08**	0.04	0.03	−0.10**	0.06**	0.04*	−.07**	0.01-	0.04**	0.11**	-	 12. Age	0.14**	0.02	0.05**	−0.01	0.51**	0.19**	.20**	0.11**	0.14**	0.01	0.08**	-  Mean (SD) [Range] / Frequency												 0: 63.22% 1: 27.55% 2: 8.32% 3 – 9: 0.91%	0: 84.97 % 1: 13.20 % 2 – 3: 1.83%	0.62 (1.06) [0 – 6]	0.61 (0.37) [0 – 1]	19.06 (1.76) [15 – 26]	3.42 (1.64) [0 – 7]	1.48 (1.43)5	0.11 (0.39) [0 – 3]	0.91 (0.95) [0 – 5]	0.32 (0.47)	W: 56.59% B: 20.56% L: 15.01% A:6.26% AIAN:1.58%	16.08 (1.56) Open in a separate window *p<.05; **p<.01 Multilevel Models Multilevel models were first tested to see if random slopes were necessary in addition to a random intercept. There was no improvement in model fit when adding a random slope of time (Δχ2 (4) = 2.95, p>.05), or a random slope of IPV, (Δχ2 (2) =0.32, p>.05). Although adding a random slope of within-person birth control use significantly improved the model (Δχ2 (2) = 16.42, p<.05), this model did not converge when adding a subsequent cross-level interaction involving within-person IPV. Therefore, all models were estimated with random intercepts and fixed effects, except when estimating cross-level interactions. Intraclass correlation coefficients were also examined; both the non-pregnancy vs AEP group (ICC = 0.43) and the nAEP vs AEP group (ICC=0.60) had reasonable between-person variability. Within and between-person main effects of physical IPV, birth control use, and adolescent alcohol use on AEP Table 2 displays the main effects using either non-pregnancy or nAEP as the reference group. As indicated, there were within-person (relationship-specific) effects. For every increase in presence of a specific physical IPV indicator within a relationship, compared to other relationships, odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy increased by 164%. Similarly, there was a 1.36 higher odds of AEP compared to nAEP, in relationships with increased IPV indicators compared to other relationships. There were no within-person significant effects for birth control use. In other words, using birth control consistently within a relationship, compared to other relationships, did not significantly increase the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy or nAEP outcomes. Table 2. Multi-level model parameters for odd ratios of AEP compared to reference variables non-pregnancy and nAEP AEP (vs non-pregnancy)	AEP (vs nAEP) Level 1			 Within-person Physical IPV	1.64** (1.27 – 2.12)	1.36* (1.08 – 1.72) Within-person Consistent Birth Control Use	0.50 (0.27 – 0.91)	1.71 (0.96 – 3.07) Within-person Length of Relationship	1.14* (1.04 – 1.25)	0.88* (0.80 – 0.97) Within-person Age at Start of Relationship	0.98 (0.90 – 1.05)	1.05 (0.97 – 1.13) Level 2			 Between-person Physical IPV	2.00** (1.68 – 2.38)	1.54** (1.32 – 1.81) Between-person Consistent Birth Control Use	0.34** (0.18 – 0.66)	0.38* (0.20 – 0.73) Between-person Length of Relationship	0.94 (0.83 – 1.05)	0.72** (0.64 – 0.80) Between-person Age at Start of Relationship	0.77** (0.69 – 0.86)	0.91 (0.80 – 1.04) Adolescent Infrequent Past Year Drinking (vs non/Abs.)	1.44 (0.94 – 2.18)	1.75* (1.13 – 2.70) Adolescent Moderate-Heavy Past Year Drinking (vs non/Abs.)	1.76* (1.17 – 2.66)	1.95** (1.25 – 3.05) Average IPV Experiences in Adolescent Relationships	1.68** (1.24 – 2.28)	1.23 (0.92 – 1.65) Adolescent Total Romantic/Sexual Partners	1.33** (1.11 – 1.58)	1.16 (0.95 – 1.40) Child Abuse History	1.34 (0.94 – 1.94)	1.33 (0.91 – 1.95) African American (vs White)	1.35 (0.79 – 2.32)	0.59 (0.35 – 0.98) Latino/a (vs White)	0.81 (0.46 – 1.41)	0.63 (0.36 – 1.09) Other Race (vs White)	1.01 (0.43 – 2.34)	1.13 (0.47 – 2.71) Age at WII	1.22* (1.04 – 1.43)	0.99 (0.85 – 1.15) Open in a separate window *p<.05; **p<.01 Note: AEP = “alcohol-exposed pregnancy”; IPV = “intimate partner violence”; Abs = “abstinence from alcohol There were also significant between-person effects distinguishing non-pregnancy from AEP and nAEP from AEP. For every additional physical IPV indicator experienced within the five-year span (averaged over all relationships), compared to other individuals, increased the overall odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy by 200%, and increased the overall odds of AEP compared to nAEP by 154%. Therefore, not only did IPV have within-relationship influence, but also distinguished AEP outcomes between individuals. In addition, individuals who used birth control more consistently over the 5-year period compared to other individuals decreased odds of AEP by 66% (compared to non-pregnancy) and 62% (compared to nAEP). Finally, alcohol use in adolescence increased odds of AEP. Individuals who reported past-year infrequent drinking in adolescence, compared to those who reported abstention or no past year drinking, increased odds of overall AEP compared to nAEP in adulthood by 175%. Those who reported heavy or moderate past-year drinking in adolescence, compared to those who reported abstention or no past year drinking, increased odds of AEP in adulthood by 176% (compared to no-pregnancy) or 195% (compared to nAEP). Therefore, adolescent drinking overall increased higher odds of AEP compared to either non-pregnancy or nAEP outcomes in adulthood. Interactions between IPV, adolescent alcohol use, and birth control use Between-person IPV moderated the effect of infrequent past-year adolescent alcohol use on the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy (OR = 1.49, p<.05, (95% CI (1.09 – 2.05)) and AEP compared to nAEP, (OR = 1.63, p<.05, 95% CI (1.21 – 2.19)). As seen in Figure 1a–b, the odds of AEP compared to non-pregnancy (1a) or nAEP (1b) were generally low. However, experiencing higher levels of physical IPV substantially increased the effect of infrequent adolescent drinking on the odds of AEP. For example, when examining the odds of AEP compared to nAEP (Figure 1b) the odds of AEP for an infrequent adolescent drinker who experienced no IPV from any romantic relationship in the past five years was 0.15. The odds of AEP for an infrequent adolescent drinker who experienced high IPV (e.g., 3 unique physical IPV indicators averaged across all romantic relationships in the past five years) was 1.03. Comparatively, the odds of AEP for moderate to heavy adolescent drinkers was 0.29 to 0.55 for those who experienced no or high IPV respectively. In other words, higher levels of average physical IPV over the five-year period significantly increased the odds of AEP for infrequent adolescent drinkers, compared to non-drinkers, however, IPV experience did not significantly increase the odds of AEP for moderate-heavy adolescent drinkers, compared to non-drinkers. There were no other significant interactions of IPV on either adolescent alcohol use or birth control use (see Supplemental Table 1a–b). An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc. Object name is nihms-1008931-f0001.jpg Figure 1A-B. Level 2 IPV × adolescent past year drinking frequency interaction predicting odds of AEP vs non-pregnancy (A) and AEP vs nAEP (B) Note: IPV levels indicate average items endorsed over all relationships in past 5 years. Range of IPV is from 0 (no items) to 3 (3 items). Post Hoc Tests Alcohol use was assessed at adolescence (WII) to ensure directionality. Although alcohol use was also assessed at WIII, there was no alcohol use information that accompanied the timeline of relationships or pregnancies beyond the measure of AEP. However, given that alcohol use will most likely change over the five years between WII and WIII (e.g., a trend towards increasing in later adolescence/young adulthood; Chassin et al., 2004), we also ran models using the WIII alcohol variable. As with the main models, there were two dummy codes reflecting three categories (no past-year use, infrequent past year use, and moderate – to – high past year use). As WIII abstainers had been excluded from the study sample, the young adult no past-year use category included only those who had reported any lifetime use, but no past year use. Supplemental Table 2 displays frequency tables for comparing adolescent and young adult drinking rates. Similarly, in adolescents and young adults, non-abstaining, non-past year drinkers and heavy drinkers had the lowest categories. Supplemental Table 3a–3b displays the WIII-alcohol use variable models. Similar to the WII alcohol-use model, individuals who reported moderate/heavy alcohol use at WIII had higher odds of (previously) reporting AEP compared to nAEP; compared to non-drinkers, those who reported moderate or heavy drinking had 353% higher odds of an AEP. However, there were no other significant associations between WIII alcohol use and AEP outcomes. In addition, compared to the WII-alcohol model, there were no within-person significant effects of IPV or birth control use on distinguishing AEP from nAEP. There were significant within-person effects distinguishing AEP from non-pregnancy, similar to the WII-alcohol use model. Between-person effects for IPV and birth control were similar to the WII-alcohol use model. There were also no significant interactions. Go to: Discussion The purpose of this study was to examine the role of physical IPV as a risk factor for AEP as a unique predictor and a potential moderator of the two main behaviors emphasized in preconceptional AEP prevention programs: alcohol use and birth control. We found that IPV was a strong influence on AEP both within specific relationships and between people. IPV had little moderating influence on AEP outcomes; the one significant interaction highlights the contexts in which IPV may strengthen the history of (adolescent) alcohol use on later AEP. Intimate partner violence as a main effect As hypothesized, IPV related to higher odds of AEP, alongside higher alcohol use and lower birth control use. Individuals experiencing higher physical IPV within the 5–year period, compared to individuals who experienced less physical IPV, had higher odds of reporting any AEP outcome. This is consistent with studies comparing pregnant women who do or do not abstain from alcohol use (e.g., Kitsantas et al., 2015; McDonald et al., 2014; Powers et al., 2013). Experiencing IPV also had a direct influence on AEP compared to non-pregnancy and nAEP as a within-person (within-relationship) effect. Given the variety of ways in which physical IPV related to AEP, multiple explanations are needed. The association between IPV and unintended pregnancy, typically via lower associated levels of birth control (Miller et al., 2010; Pallitto et al., 2005) could explain within-person effects of IPV. Physical IPV (as measured here), is often accompanied by other forms of IPV that can further facilitate pregnancy, such as sexual IPV or reproductive coercion (Katz et al., 2017; Tanha et al., 2010). Another contributing explanation, pertaining to the within-person effect of IPV on AEP versus nAEP, may be the continued or even new experiences of IPV during pregnancy. There are less reported instances of IPV during pregnancy compared to non-pregnancy (e.g., Silverman, et al., 2006), however relationships marked by IPV can continue into pregnancy (James et al., 2013), and such IPV tends to increase in severity during pregnancy (Brownridge, et al., 2011). Substance use can increase during this time (Martin et al., 2003), if used as a coping mechanism. Between-person IPV effects indicate additional third variable explanations for the association between physical IPV and AEP vs nAEP. Variables related to both AEP and IPV include anxiety (Alvik et al., 2006; Pico-Alfonso, et al., 2006) and illicit drug use (Anderson et al., 2012; Harrisson & Sidebottom, 2009). Third variable explanations may also include pervasive forms of IPV such as coercive control, psychological/emotional violence, or even substance use coercion itself (Rivera et al., 2015; Warshaw et al., 2014). These types of IPV result in negative health outcomes such as substance use or lower birth control that are as strong as, or stronger than physical IPV effects (e.g., Ansara & Hindin, 2010; Coker et al., 2002). Most research examining the relationship between IPV and AEP either do not classify IPV typology (Anderson et al., 2014), only assess physical IPV (Kisantas et al., 2015), or aggregate IPV forms (McDonald et al., 2014). Roberts et al., (2014) documented that, within women seeking services for pregnancy termination, psychological IPV did not predict AEP when controlling for physical IPV. However it is unknown if these results generalize to other pregnancy/preconceptual situations. Intimate partner violence as a moderator Contrary to hypotheses, IPV was not a prominent moderator for alcohol use or birth control. Infrequent drinking in adolescence, compared to abstinence / no past year drinking, related to increased odds of AEP in young adulthood for those experiencing more IPV. This interaction highlights the way that IPV, or related third-variable contexts, can increase AEP vulnerability for women with a history of lower-level adolescent drinking. The strong association between earlier high drinking trajectories and alcohol use disorders (Deutsch et al., 2017, Hingson et al., 2006) may explain the lack of interaction between IPV and higher levels of adolescent drinking. For heavier adolescent drinkers, alcohol cessation during pregnancy may be more difficult regardless of external environment (e.g., IPV experience). However, IPV contexts may potentially reinforce drinking for individuals with a history of lower level alcohol use; individuals who otherwise may be more likely to stop drinking during pregnancy (Anderson et al., 2014; Okeefe et al., 2015). Birth control effects were not strengthened by IPV. We expected that there might be an interaction due to the strong relationship between IPV and birth control use (Tanaha et al., 2010) and IPV and unintended pregnancy (Miller et al., 2010). It is possible that other IPV forms more related to birth control use (e.g., coercive control) would strengthen birth control use effects. Alternatively, interactions between IPV and birth control use may be more relevant for unintended pregnancy, compared to AEP outcomes. Given the strong relationship between unintended pregnancy and AEP (e.g., McDonald et al., 2014), it may be beneficial to examine a mediating relationship between IPV/birth control, unintended pregnancy, and AEP. Intimate Partner Violence as an indicator of AEP risk for intervention programs The current findings support the notion that IPV, and other (third-variable) predictors that may relate to both AEP and substance use, may warrant special attention in AEP prevention curricula, as IPV related to declines in both outcomes preferred over AEP: non-pregnancy and nAEP. Most preconceptual short-term AEP interventions demonstrate improvement in birth control use (e.g., Hanson et al., 2017; Ingersoll et al., 2013, 2018, Wilton et al., 2013), indicating AEP prevention through these programs is mostly due to non-pregnancy outcomes. Variables contributing to maintenance of alcohol use, or contexts in which substance use and low birth control use are part of a larger system of lack of control or autonomy, might need emphasis outside of the personal feedback, motivational interview, or self-guided behavioral change formats, particularly for women who become pregnant. Strengths and Limitations The longitudinal, prospective data is a strength of the study, allowing us to examine change within individuals (between relationships). We also compared AEP to both favorable outcomes for preconceptual AEP prevention programs: non-pregnancy and nAEP. Prior studies typically only compare AEP and nAEP (pregnancy samples; Anderson et al., 2012; Frankenberger et al., 2015; Skagerstrom et al., 2013). A main limitation is the lack of other important within-relationship variables, particularly alcohol use. Time between adolescent alcohol use and each relationship was up to five years (average time difference between WII age and mean age at relationship start [across all relationships] was 2.74 (SD = 1.67), average time difference between WII age and mean age at due date [across all pregnancies] was 3.42 (SD = 1.82)4. Although Add Health includes both WII and WIII past year alcohol use, we used WII to ensure directionality. Another potential issue was the sample age, as women who drink while pregnant tend to skew older (e.g., Meschke et al., 2013) than the youngest sample participants. It is also possible that participants did not recognize their alcohol consumption during pregnancy. Retrospective reports for alcohol use are potentially less valid than prospective reports, although AEP may be more under-reported within prospective studies (Alvik et al., 2006). Finally, we only examined physical IPV. Including other types of IPV (e.g., psychological, emotional, coercive control) could have produced different results. Implications and Future Directions It should be noted that longer-term, case-management style AEP interventions, in which participants connect to a variety of services, improve both birth control use and alcohol use behavior (e.g., Grant et al., 2005; Rasmussen et al., 2012). There is also a personal goal component, but these goals are more multidimensional (e.g., “personal skills management”). However, these programs may not be pragmatic in highly impoverished, resource-poor areas; adding emphasis on contextual components to brief, scalable AEP prevention programs may be more feasible. AEP risk involves more than high alcohol use and low birth control use. Highly complex biological and environmental etiologies for alcohol use and addiction may necessitate longer-term comprehensive care for interventions targeting reduction or abstinence. Such comprehensive care may also be needed for participants who have not only experienced IPV or trauma, but also for participants who live in resource-scarce areas or in areas with limited alternatives for social support (e.g., highly rural or isolated areas). Although current interventions have substantially reduced AEP, consideration of mental health and maladaptive environments as barriers for behavioral change are critical for developing new or improved programs. Go to: Supplementary Material Supp TableS1 Click here to view.(23K, docx) Supp TableS2 Click here to view.(16K, docx) Supp TableS3 Click here to view.(19K, docx) Go to: Acknowledgements: Funding for this study was provided by P20 GM121341–01. This research uses data from Add Health, a program project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris and designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for assistance in the original design. Information on how to obtain the Add Health data files is available on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth). No direct support was received from grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis. Go to: Footnotes 1This variable was a composite of psychological (threatening) and physical (pushing, shoving, throwing something that can hurt) items, which we included as a physical item. 2An additional category splitting apart moderate and heavy drinkers (e.g., drinking at least three days a week) was initially included in the model. However, due to similarly small cell sizes of this category (n=78, 2.65%) the moderate and high categories were combined. Estimations that include both the non-past year drinking and heavy drinking categories are available upon request. 3This includes individuals who reported five total relationships or more than five relationships 4A small percentage of individuals reported that their first relationship in the past five years started earlier than their reported age at WII (n=37). A small number of individuals also reported that their first pregnancy with their first partner from the past five years was prior to their age at WII (n=38). 5For correlation purposes, we used a continuous drinking frequency variable. However, for the dummy variables, 44.68% of participants reported total abstention or no past year drinking, 35.31% reported infrequent drinking, and 20% reported moderate to heavy drinking.
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClssification would be inverse.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'not applicable', or 'uncorrelated'.
Direct means that an increase in one would cause a decrease in another, and inverse means that an increase in one would cause a decreaset in another.
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 7 relations:
IPV -> AEP
Adolescent alcohol use -> AEP
Between-person birth control use -> AEP
IPV -> Contraceptive use
Birth control within a relationship -> AEP
Consistent birth control use over a 5-year period or more -> AEP
IPV -> Birth control
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT
        


Input begins:
START TEXT
Abstract
Difficulty regulating emotions following stressful events is a hallmark of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD__ Although individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions is believed to have direct consequences for both emotional and physical wellbeing_ few studies have examined the cardiovascular effects of different emotion regulation strategies in MDD_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine the effects of two emotion regulation strategies_ cognitive distraction and rumination_ on both self_reported sadness and respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ in individuals with MDD and healthy controls _CTLs__ Following a forced_failure stressor_ participants were randomly assigned to a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ Thus_ although depressed individuals are able to use cognitive distraction to emotionally recover from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort_ Adding low_cost physiological measures such as RSA into assessments has the potential to offer new and important information about the effects of emotion regulation on mental and physiological health_

Keywords_ depression_ stress_ emotion regulation_ respiratory sinus arrhythmia_ autonomic nervous system
Exaggerated emotional and cardiovascular responses to stress are central characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder _MDD_ e_g__ Brown _ Harris_ 1986_ Lazarus _ Folkman_ 1984_ Monroe _ Hadjiyannakis_ 2002__ and can have detrimental effects on mental and physical wellbeing _for a review see Grippo _ Johnson_ 2009__ In fact_ an altered response to stress is a primary pathophysiological mechanism linking MDD to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality_ Although past research has focused on individual differences in the initial reactivity to stress_ studies increasingly emphasize the importance of examining individuals_ ability to regulate their emotions after the stressor ends _Flynn _ Rudolph_ 2007_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Wisco_ _ Lyubomirsky_ 2008__ For example_ models of stress and health posit that emotion regulation strategies are critical determinants of emotional and cardiovascular health_ particularly for those with psychopathology _Brosschot_ Gerin_ _ Thayer_ 2006_ Kubzansky_ Davidson_ _ Rozanski_ 2005__ Despite this_ little is known about the effects of using different emotion regulation strategies on cardiovascular activity in MDD_

The parasympathetic nervous system plays an important role in regulating cardiovascular activity_ More specifically_ the parasympathetic nervous system influences oscillations in heart rate via its effect on the vagus nerve_ which affects heart rate acceleration and deceleration during respiration_ Whereas vagal activity is temporarily suppressed during inhalation_ causing heart rate to increase_ vagal activity resumes during exhalation_ causing heart rate to decrease_ Greater parasympathetic input leads to greater heart rate acceleration after inhalation and greater heart rate deceleration after exhalation_ Thus_ greater parasympathetic activity is associated with greater variability in the interval between heartbeats_ Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ has been identified as an optimal marker of this beat_to_beat variation in heart rate linked to the respiratory cycle_ RSA offers advantages over other measures of the parasympathetic nervous system _e_g__ low_frequency heart rate variability_ given that it is unconfounded by sympathetic activation _Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Quigley_ 1993__ RSA also has advantages over other measures of biological functioning_ For one_ RSA is relatively inexpensive in that the per subject cost of data collection is minimal_ RSA data collection is also far less invasive than other methods for collecting biological data_ In fact_ with the development of technology to collect ambulatory RSA_ it is increasingly feasible to measure RSA data in applied research and clinical settings with minimal or no disruption to the individual _Cullins et al__ 2013_ Goedhart_ de Vries_ Kreft_ Bakker_ _ de Geus_ 2008_ Grossman_ Wilhelm_ _ Spoerle_ 2004__

Given the advantages of collecting RSA data_ it is not surprising that RSA is used frequently to index parasympathetic activity _see Berntson_ Cacioppo_ _ Grossman_ 2007_ for an overview__ Parasympathetic activity_ and thus RSA_ is high during times of rest_ when energy expenditure is actively reduced _e_g__ by inhibiting the sympathetic innervations of the heart_ Lovallo _ Thomas_ 2000_ Rottenberg_ 2007__ However_ when environmental demands become more challenging_ such as in a time of stress_ this _brake_ _Rottenberg_ 2007_ is rapidly withdrawn in order to meet environmental demands_ Thus_ adaptive parasympathetic responses to stress trigger moderate RSA withdrawal _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Kreibig_ 2010__ RSA withdrawal allows autonomic changes that prime the body for action and facilitate responses to environmental changes_ including better executive functioning and social competence _Blair _ Peters_ 2003_ Marcovitch et al__ 2010__ In contrast to adaptive physiological responses to stress_ exaggerated reactivity or delayed recovery _evidenced by greater or longer RSA withdrawal_ places the body under excessive strain and increases risk for cardiovascular and other organic diseases _Crowell_ Skidmore_ Rau _ Williams_ 2013__ To facilitate recovery_ the body activates the parasympathetic nervous system_ leading to increased RSA_ Individual differences in the use of emotion regulation strategies may be associated with different amounts of parasympathetic activation_ and these differences may be particularly relevant for individuals with MDD_ who are at greater risk for poor health outcomes_ including cardiovascular disease _Keicolt_Gaser _ Glaser_ 2002__

Past research on emotion regulation and recovery from stress in MDD focuses largely on self_reported sadness_ Whereas adaptive emotion regulation strategies facilitate recovery from stress_ maladaptive emotion regulation strategies prolong depressed mood_ Distraction is typically considered an adaptive emotion regulation strategy in the short_term given that it decreases sadness and facilitates engagement in behaviors that are likely to further improve mood _Donaldson _ Lam_ 2004_ Watkins_ Teasdale_ _ Williams_ 2000__ Both healthy controls and individuals with MDD are able to effectively down_regulate negative emotions when exposed to a distraction induction _for a review see Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008__ Unlike healthy controls_ however_ individuals with MDD do not often spontaneously engage in distraction in everyday life_ This may be due_ in part_ to the fact that it is difficult for depressed individuals to disengage from negative thoughts_ resulting in an unproductive pattern of ruminative thinking _Joormann_ 2010_ Nolen_Hoeksema_ Morrow_ _ Fredrickson_ 1993__ The response styles theory _Nolen_Hoeksema_ 1991_ Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ defines rumination as repeatedly thinking about negative feelings and the potential antecedents or repercussions of those feelings_ In contrast to distraction_ ruminative responses to stress increase the duration and severity of depressed moods _Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 1993__

Although the emotional consequences of rumination and distraction have been well established _see Lyubomirsky _ Tkach_ 2004_ and Nolen_Hoeksema et al__ 2008_ for reviews__ less is known about the effects of these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ Initial evidence indicates that both anger and depressive rumination are associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Key_ Campbell_ Bacon_ _ Gerin_ 2008_ Ottaviani_ Shapiro_ Davydov_ Goldstein_ _ Mills_ 2009__ whereas distraction is associated with parasympathetic activation _Gerin_ Davidson_ Christenfeld_ Goyal_ _ Schwartz_ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ Ottaviani et al__ 2011__ The majority of studies use passive distraction tasks_ which involve passively viewing neutral movies or images _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ By contrast_ other studies use cognitive distraction tasks_ which require greater cognitive control and demand_ Cognitive distraction has been shown to be effective at improving negative mood _Eisenberg _ Morris_ 2003_ Eisenberg_ Morris_ _ Spinrad_ 2008__ The effect of cognitive distraction on parasympathetic activity_ however_ is more uncertain and has not been examined in MDD_

The primary goal of the current study was to compare clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ In the process_ we hoped to demonstrate the importance and feasibility of adding physiological measures to assessments of emotion regulation_ In this study_ participants were exposed to a forced_failure stressor_ selected for its ability both to induce sad mood _Hammen_ 2005_ and to trigger biological changes _Kirschbaum_ Pirke_ _ Hellhammer_ 1993__ Following the forced_failure task_ participants were randomly assigned either to ruminate on their poor performance or to cognitively distract themselves from it_ We measured RSA reactivity before and during the forced_failure and emotion regulation periods_ Whereas we expected rumination to be associated with RSA withdrawal in both the MDD and control groups_ we expected cognitive distraction to be associated with RSA activation in both groups_

Method
Participants
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the current study were determined via an in_person Structured Clinical Interview for DSM_IV _SCID_ First_ Spitzer_ Gibbon_ _ Williams_ 2002__ which was conducted by trained graduate students_ Strong inter_rater reliability was established_ _ _ 1_00_ Participants were included if they were between the ages of 18 and 60 and were in one of two groups_ those who met criteria for current major depressive disorder _MDD_ n _ 47__ and those who did not meet criteria for any past or current Axis I disorder _Control_ CTL_ n _ 51__ Participants were excluded due to severe head trauma_ learning disabilities_ bipolar disorder_ psychotic symptoms_ alcohol or substance abuse within the past six months_ or medical conditions that would affect psychophysiological recordings _e_g__ heart murmur__ Data from 7 participants with MDD and 4 CTLs could not be included due to excessive movement artefacts or signal error_ Thus_ the final sample included 40 participants in the MDD group and 47 in the CTL group_

Forced_Failure Stressor
Three forced_failure tasks were used to elicit distress_ The first was a facial identification task with false feedback indicating that the participant performed poorly_ This 10_minute task was adapted from Tran_ Siemer_ and Joormann _2011__ Participants were asked to identify the emotional expression _happy_ sad_ angry_ depicted in subliminally presented facial expressions_ Participants repeatedly received feedback that they were performing poorly relative to others who had already completed the task_ and the experimenter urged participants to try harder_ The second task was an anagram task_ in which approximately 30_ of the anagrams were unsolvable_ Participants were given 5 minutes to solve as many anagrams as possible but allowed only 30 seconds to solve each anagram_ In the third task_ participants were given 5 minutes to count backward aloud from 2_083 to zero in 13_step sequences _Kirschbaum et al__ 1993__

Rumination and Distraction Induction
Participants were randomly assigned to either a rumination or cognitive distraction condition_ which was adapted from the standard rumination and distraction _R_D_ task created by Nolen_Hoeksema and Morrow _1993__ Regardless of the condition_ participants viewed seven prompts one_at_a_time on the computer screen_ and they were asked to think and write about each prompt for two minutes_ Rumination prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts that were emotion or self_focused _e_g__ _why your performance on the tests earlier today made you feel the way it did_ or _what people would think of you if they had observed you complete the tests earlier today___ In contrast_ cognitive distraction prompts focused participants_ attention on thoughts unrelated to the self _e_g__ _how to make a peanut_butter_and_jelly sandwich_ Describe it in detail_ with as many steps as possible__ or _the layout of your local mall_ Walk the entire length in your mind and describe the stores_ things_ or people you would see___ Participants_ written statements were later coded based on Hilt and Pollak _2013_ by two independent raters who were blind to group and condition_ Rumination score ratings were made on a 5_point Likert scale ranging from 1 _Not at all ruminating_ to 5 _Completely ruminating__ ICC _ _84_

Measures
Sadness ratings We examined sadness ratings assessed at 4 points_ at the end of the baseline period_ in the middle of the forced_failure induction_ immediately before the R_D induction_ and immediately after the R_D induction_ Participants rated their sadness on an 11_point Likert_scale ranging from 0 _not at all_ to 10 _very much__ We focused on sadness as opposed to other metrics of affect _e_g__ general negative affect_ given that sadness is central to MDD_ a common response to forced_failure stressors _Hammen_ 2005__ and the affective dimension most directly targeted by our rumination induction _Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1993__
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia _RSA_ Electrocardiograph _ECG_ and respiration frequency were recorded with a computer_based data acquisition system _MP150_ Biopac Systems__ Three standard electrodes were attached bilaterally to participants_ left and right upper rib cage and right collarbone_ To measure respiration frequency_ a strain_gauge transducer belt was attached around the chest above the ribcage and below the bust_ Data was collected using BIOPAC bioamplifiers_ The ECG and respiration frequency signals were sampled at a rate of 1_000 Hz_ digitized with a 16_bit analog_to_digital converter_ and processed using AcqKnowledge and MindWare software_ Following recommendations of the Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology _1996__ we used a frequency domain measure of heart rate variability_ namely RSA_ Thus_ vagal activation was indexed by measuring heart rate variability in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz _high frequency_ heart rate variability__ R_wave markers in the ECG signal were evaluated for artifacts by visual inspection and the MAD_MED artifact detection algorithm implemented in MindWare software _Mindware Heart Rate Variability Application_ version 2_51_ Mindware Technologies Ltd___ Identified artifacts were then manually corrected_ Beat_to_beat interval series were obtained from the ECG and converted into time series of instantaneous beat_to_beat intervals with a resolution of 4 Hz_ Spectral analysis using the Welch method determined the power spectral density in the frequency band between _14 and _4 Hz_ This value is then automatically log_transformed to correct for the non_normal distribution_ and minute_by_minute estimates of RSA were determined_ This approach accords with best_practice guidelines for frequency domain methods to calculate RSA _Berntson et al__ 1993_ Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology_ 1996__ Data were then analyzed in 5_minute increments_ or as close to this interval as tasks would allow_ Specifically_ RSA was measured during the following four periods_ 1_ During the 5_minute nature video _baseline__ which occurred immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ 2_ During the first 5 minutes of the forced_failure stressor_ 3_ During the 5 minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ when participants were completing the forced_failure stressor _approximately 15_20 minutes after the forced_failure onset__ and 4_ During the first 6 minutes of the R_D induction _i_e__ during the first three R_D prompts__
Questionnaires Participants completed the Beck Depression Inventory_II _BDI_ Beck_ Steer_ _ Brown_ 1996__ a 21_item measure assessing depressive symptom severity __ _ _97__ Additionally_ participants completed the Ruminative Responses Scale of the Response Style Questionnaire _RRS_ Nolen_Hoeksema _ Morrow_ 1991__ a 22_item self_report questionnaire assessing individual differences in the tendency to ruminate when sad __ _ _99__
Procedure
After participants provided informed consent_ approximately 5 minutes were taken to attach psychophysiological equipment and ensure the accurate collection of RSA data_ Participants then watched a 5_minute nature video followed by the forced_failure stressor_ Next_ participants were randomly assigned to the rumination or cognitive distraction condition of the R_D induction_ Before leaving the laboratory_ participants watched a calming nature video in order to provide ample time for mood to return to baseline_ Participants completed demographic and clinical questionnaires at the end of the experiment_

Data Analysis
Analyses were conducted with SPSS version 20_0_ Baseline and demographic data were analyzed via one_way analysis of variance _ANOVA_ and chi square tests_ To examine the effect of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction on self_reported sadness and RSA_ we examined the changes in sadness and RSA as a result of the forced_failure stressor and R_D induction_ For example_ sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor was calculated as sadness rated during the forced_failure induction minus sadness at baseline_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction was calculated as sadness rated after the R_D induction minus sadness immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate increases in sadness_ negative scores indicate decreases in sadness_ Similarly_ RSA reactivity during the forced_failure stressor was calculated as RSA measured during the first five minutes of the forced_failure stressor minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the forced_failure stressor_ RSA reactivity during the R_D induction was calculated as RSA measured during the first six minutes of the R_D induction minus RSA measured during the five minutes immediately before the R_D induction_ Positive scores indicate RSA activation_ negative scores indicate RSA withdrawal_ Univariate ANOVAs were used to examine reactivity and recovery scores by group _MDD_ CTL_ and condition _rumination_ cognitive distraction__

Go to_
Results
Participant and Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and clinical data are presented in Table 1_ There was no significant difference in ethnicity across group or condition_ _2s_1_ N_86_ _ 1_ and ethnicity did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ _2s_1_ N_43_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Age also did not significantly differ across groups or conditions_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ and age did not significantly differ by group within the rumination_ t_42_ _ 1_66_ or cognitive distraction conditions_ t_41_ _ 1_40_ ps _ _05_ Although there was a significant difference in proportion who were female across group_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 3_86_ p _ _05_ and condition_ _2_1_ N_87_ _ 5_09_ p _ _05_ the proportion female did not differ across diagnostic group within the rumination_ _2_1_ N_44_ _ 2_93_ or cognitive distraction condition_ _2_1_ N_43_ _ 1_28_ ps _ _05_ As expected_ BDI _depressive symptoms__ RRS _trait rumination__ and baseline sadness ratings were significantly higher in the MDD versus CTL group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 39_19_ ps _ _001_ Scores_ however_ did not differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 82_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ Baseline RSA did not differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_

Table 1
Participant Characteristics

CTL _N _ 47_
MDD _N _ 40_
Variable_Rumination_Distraction_Rumination_Distraction
Age_ M _SD__34_63 _12_00__40_74 _11_30__40_65 _11_96__35_70 _12_28_
Sex _female_male__5_19_11_12_9_11_13_7
Caucasian_ __39_13_39_13_35_00_30_00
BDI_ M _SD__3_21 _6_26__4_00 _5_29__29_84 _13_10__31_95 _11_07_
RRS_ M _SD__31_91 _10_33__31_13 _8_07__66_16 _9_01__68_00 _11_12_
Rumination Score_ M _SD__10_58 _3_61__7_23 _0_43__16_50 _4_88__7_80 _2_02_
Open in a separate window
R_D Induction Manipulation Check
Participants_ written responses during the R_D induction were coded for the extent to which they were ruminating _see Rumination Score in Table 1__ There was a main effect of R_D condition_ F_1_ 82_ _ 76_38_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _48_ and a main effect of diagnostic group_ F_1_ 82_ _ 22_13_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _21_ However_ these main effects were qualified by a significant group by condition interaction_ F_1_ 82_ _ 15_01_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ Although MDDs in the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than CTLs in the rumination condition_ F_1_ 42_ _ 21_31_ p _ _001_ rumination scores did not differ between MDDs and CTLs in the cognitive distraction condition_ F_1_ 40_ _ 1_70_ p _ _05_ Importantly_ individuals assigned to the rumination condition received higher rumination scores than participants in the cognitive distraction condition in both the MDD_ F_1_ 40_ _ 54_25_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _59_ and CTL group_ F_1_ 44_ _ 18_73_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _30_

Self_Reported Sadness
Self_reported sadness was examined to ensure the forced_failure induction and R_D induction had the anticipated effects _see Figure 1__ As expected_ compared to CTLs_ the MDD group reported greater sadness reactivity to the forced_failure stressor_ F_1_ 81_ _ 7_36_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ Sadness reactivity to the failure stressor did not significantly differ by R_D condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ suggesting that random assignment was effective_ Sadness reactivity to the R_D induction did not differ by group_ F_1_ 81_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ However_ individuals in the cognitive distraction and rumination condition differed in their emotional response to the R_D induction_ F_1_ 81_ _ 6_20_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _07_ As was anticipated_ participants_ self_reported sadness decreased in the cognitive distraction condition but increased in the rumination condition_ The group by condition interaction was not significant_ F_1_ 81_ _ 2_04_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _03_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f1_jpg
Figure 1
Change in sadness in response to the forced_failure stressor and the emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased sadness during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

RSA
We first conducted a repeated_measures ANOVA with diagnostic_group and R_D condition as the between_subject factors and time as the within_subject factor_ This yielded a main effect of time_ F_3_ 249_ _ 15_51_ p _ _001_ _2 _ _16_ which was qualified by the interaction between diagnostic group_ R_D condition_ and time at the cubic level_ F_1_ 83_ _ 3_81_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ No other main or interaction effects were significant_ ps _ _05_ Follow_up tests conducted on RSA change scores indicated that_ as expected_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal in response to the forced_failure stressor_ t_86_ _ 2_64_ p _ _01 _see Figure 2__ Importantly_ RSA change during forced_failure induction did not significantly differ by group or condition_ and the group by condition interaction was not significant_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_

An external file that holds a picture_ illustration_ etc_
Object name is nihms718010f2_jpg
Figure 2
Change in RSA in response to the forced_failure stressor and emotion regulation induction in CTLs and MDDs in the rumination and distraction condition_ Higher scores indicate increased RSA during the forced_failure or Rumination and Distraction _R_D_ induction period_ Error bars indicate ___ 1 SE_

We examined RSA change during the R_D induction to test our main hypotheses_ Across conditions_ there was a significant RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction_ t_86_ _ 6_10_ p _ _001_ Whereas RSA withdrawal during the R_D induction did not significantly differ by diagnostic group or R_D condition_ Fs_1_ 83_ _ 1_ ps _ _05_ _2 _ _01_ the group by condition interaction was significant_ F_1_ 83_ _ 5_53_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _06_1 Follow_up tests showed that RSA withdrawal during rumination did not significantly differ between CTL and MDD groups_ F_1_ 42_ _ 1_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _02_ In contrast_ RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction was significantly greater for MDDs than CTLs_ F_1_ 41_ _ 5_66_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _12_ Within_group follow_up tests indicated that RSA withdrawal did not differ between CTLs in the rumination and distraction condition_ F_1_ 45_ _ 1_74_ p _ _05_ _2 _ _04_ but RSA withdrawal was significantly greater for MDDs in the distraction versus rumination condition_ F_1_ 38_ _ 5_54_ p _ _03_ _2 _ _13_

Go to_
Discussion
Even though previous studies have examined emotional responses to rumination and distraction in MDD_ little is known about the consequences of using these emotion regulation strategies on RSA_ To the best of our knowledge_ the current study is the first to examine whether clinically depressed and healthy control participants display different affective and parasympathetic responses to a rumination and cognitive distraction induction_ As expected_ rumination increased sadness and triggered RSA withdrawal for both MDDs and CTLs_ Interestingly_ although cognitive distraction reduced sadness_ it also triggered RSA withdrawal_ Moreover_ cognitive distraction was associated with greater RSA withdrawal for MDDs than CTLs_ For MDDs_ RSA withdrawal was also greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_

RSA withdrawal during rumination is in line with numerous studies reporting that both anger and depressive rumination is associated with less parasympathetic activation in analogue samples _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Key et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ It also parallels the broader literature_ which finds cardiovascular activation during perseverative thinking _ including worry_ rumination_ or trauma recall _ in analogue samples _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Our data extend this literature by comparing clinically depressed and healthy control participants_ Results demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA withdrawal did not significantly differ between MDDs and CTLs_ This finding is relevant to models of cardiovascular disease that include rumination as a mechanism through which MDD heightens risk for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality _Brosschot et al__ 2006_ Rozanski_ Blumenthal_ _ Kaplan_ 1999_ Rugulies_ 2002__ More specifically_ results from our study suggest that depressed individuals may be at heightened risk for cardiovascular disease not because rumination has a greater effect on RSA in MDDs than in CTLs_ but because MDDs spend more time using an emotion regulation strategy that is associated with parasympathetic withdrawal_ Given that rumination produced similar RSA withdrawal in the MDD and CTL groups_ models of cardiovascular risk might include not only the cardiovascular effects of rumination but also the frequency with which individuals ruminate in everyday life_

In addition_ the current study examined the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA and found RSA withdrawal instead of RSA activation_ Our results stand in contrast to observations of cardiovascular recovery during passive distraction _e_g__ Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009__ For example_ cardiovascular recovery from stress _ indexed via increased parasympathetic activity or decreased sympathetic activity _ has been observed when passively viewing neutral pictures and posters _Gerin et al__ 2006_ or when distracted by overhearing a fabricated phone conversation _Ottaviani et al__ 2008_ 2009_ 2011__ An important difference between our distraction task and passive distraction tasks is that our task required participants to engage in effortful control over their thoughts_ In fact_ it is this effort that has been posited to drive parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive tasks _Luft et al__ 2009_ Reynard et al__ 2011__ Interestingly_ greater effort has long been associated with parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ Moreover_ evidence from other experimental paradigms shows that tasks requiring cognitive effort lead to parasympathetic withdrawal _Duschek_ Muckenthaler_ Werner_ _ Reys del Paso_ 2009_ Luft_ Takase_ _ Darby_ 2009_ Reynard_ Gevirtz_ Berlow_ Brown_ _ Boutelle_ 2011_ Verkuil_ Brosschot_ Borkovec_ _ Thayer_ 2009_ although see also Butler_ Wilhelm_ _ Gross_ 2006_ and Segerstrom _ Solberg Nes_ 2007_ for evidence of parasympathetic activation__ For example_ studies report less parasympathetic activity when participants control the content of thoughts by thinking and writing about an assigned topic compared to baseline parasympathetic activity _Reynard et al__ 2011_ or when participants think about moral questions __Is it appropriate for your friend to misrepresent his curriculum vitae in order to get a job___ Verkuil et al__ 2009__ Luft et al_ _2009_ also reported lower parasympathetic activity during tasks requiring high versus low cognitive effort_ More specifically_ greater parasympathetic withdrawal was observed during a one_back working memory task compared to a simple reaction time task_

We also observed greater RSA withdrawal during cognitive distraction in the MDD versus CTL group_ Given evidence connecting effort and parasympathetic withdrawal _Lundberg _ Frankenhaeuser_ 1980__ greater RSA withdrawal in the MDD group could reflect greater effort required for depressed individuals to engage in cognitive distraction following sadness_inducing failure_ This interpretation is in line with behavioral data showing that depressed participants are slower to disengage from negative material _see reviews by Gotlib _ Joormann_ 2010_ Joormann_ 2010_ Koster_ De Lissnyder_ Derakshan_ _ De Raedt_ 2011__ It is further supported by evidence that depressed individuals show greater activation in brain regions subserving cognitive control _dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the insula_ when removing negative material from working memory _Foland_Ross_ Hamilton_ Joormann_ Berman_ Jonidees_ _ Gotlib_ 2013__ Furthermore_ during cognitive distraction_ individuals with remitted depression exhibited increased neural activity compared to healthy controls in the regulating control_network_ including the anterior cingulate _Kanske_ Heissler_ Sch_nfelder_ _ Wessa_ 2012__ The idea of cognitive effort leading to parasympathetic withdrawal is also in line with research showing lower parasympathetic activity in other clinical groups when using adaptive_ yet effortful_ emotion regulation strategies _Aldao _ Mennin_ 2012__ Specifically_ Aldao and Mennin found that individuals with generalized anxiety disorder exhibited lower parasympathetic activity when using acceptance or reappraisal to regulate their emotions compared to when passively viewing a film_ Importantly_ in the current study_ despite group differences in parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction_ both healthy controls and clinically depressed participants were able to use distraction to repair the sad mood that was induced during the forced_failure period_ Thus_ although cognitive distraction appears to facilitate emotional recovery from stress_ it may be associated with greater cognitive effort for individuals with MDD_ In fact_ for individuals with MDD_ RSA withdrawal was even greater during cognitive distraction than rumination_ further emphasizing the effort required for this population to engage in cognitive distraction_ The fact that we observed a different pattern of findings for RSA and self_reported affect in the MDD versus CTL group underscores the importance of adding physiological measures to clinical assessments_

It is also noteworthy that_ in this study_ baseline RSA did not differ between MDD and CTL participants_ Interestingly_ the literature on baseline RSA in depression is mixed_ Whereas some studies report lower RSA levels in depressed compared to control participants _Dalack _ Roose_ 1990_ Lehofer et al__ 1999_ Rottenberg_ Clift_ Bolden_ _ Salomon_ 2007__ others report no differences in RSA levels _e_g__ Lehofer et al__ 1997_ Moser et al__ 1998__ Although a meta_analysis conducted by Rottenberg _2007_ found that depression was associated with lower levels of resting RSA _d _ _33__ only 6 of the 39 comparisons indicated a significant difference between depressed and control participants_ and depression accounted for only about 2_ of the variance in RSA_ Moreover_ Rottenberg _2007_ concludes that the overall effect of depression on RSA likely reflects an upper_bound estimate that may be very modest after accounting for confounds and unpublished studies_ thereby casting doubt on the effects of depression on baseline RSA_ When incorporating our findings on baseline RSA into the broader literature_ it is important to consider the fact that we measured baseline RSA while participants were watching a calming nature video_ which may have served as a passive distraction task_ which has been shown to increase parasympathetic activity _Gerin et al__ 2006_ Ottaviani et al__ 2009_ 2011__ We_ therefore_ caution against direct comparison between baseline RSA measured in the current study with that measured in studies where participants are not engaging in any activity_

The current study has several limitations_ For one_ comorbid health conditions were determined based on participants_ self report_ and it is possible that participants may have been unaware of prior cardiovascular conditions that would have affected RSA_ However_ using reactivity and recovery_ as opposed to raw scores_ minimized external sources of variability_ Nonetheless_ future work might consider including a physical checkup_ Future studies might also include additional measures of cardiovascular health_ including blood pressure or pre_ejection period _PEP__ A second limitation is that the current study did not directly assess self_reported effort_ which prevents us from drawing a direct connection between effort and parasympathetic withdrawal during the cognitive distraction induction_ Lastly_ despite random assignment to the cognitive distraction and rumination conditions_ there was an unequal proportion of female participants across cells_ Importantly_ however_ the group by condition interaction on RSA recovery remained significant when sex was included in the model_

Despite these limitations_ the current study offers a unique examination of parasympathetic activity during a rumination and cognitive distraction induction in clinically depressed versus healthy control participants_ Findings demonstrate that the effect of rumination on RSA did not significantly differ between the MDD and CTL groups_ In addition_ the current study provides the first evidence of the effects of cognitive distraction on RSA in MDD_ Our results demonstrate that distraction leads to greater parasympathetic withdrawal_ indexed via RSA withdrawal_ for MDDs than CTLs_ which may reflect that depressed individuals require additional effort to disengage from negative material_ We hope that this study also demonstrates the importance and feasibility of incorporating physiological measures into assessments of emotion regulation_ Assessing RSA activity can provide information about parasympathetic activation that cannot be obtained from self_report measures_ Thus_ information on RSA could help understand the effects of different emotion regulation strategies on patients_ physical health_ which is especially relevant for patients with comorbid health conditions_ In addition_ to the extent that RSA withdrawal indexes cognitive effort_ examining changes in RSA during cognitive distraction may prove a useful tool to assess skill integration as treatment progresses_ With practice_ cognitive distraction should become less effortful for depressed individuals_ leading to less RSA withdrawal_ These assessment options are possible given that RSA provides a low_cost physiological measure that can be assessed with minimal disruption in applied research and clinical settings_ With the development of devices to collect ambulatory RSA_ barriers to data collection have decreased even further_ Future work might examine parasympathetic activation during other emotion regulation strategies_ including the use of emotion regulation strategies in naturalistic settings_ Additionally_ investigators conducting research in applied or clinical settings might test whether parasympathetic withdrawal during cognitive distraction decreases with treatment or practice_

Go to_
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant F31_MH086246_

Go to_
Footnotes
1Including sex as a covariate did not affect the significant diagnostic group by R_D condition interaction_ F_1_ 79_ _ 6_76_ p _ _01_ _2 _ _08_ There were no significant main or interactive effects with sex_ Fs _ 1_
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClassification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClassification would be inverse.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'not applicable', or 'uncorrelated'.
Direct means that an increase in one would cause a decrease in another, and inverse means that an increase in one would cause a decrease in another.
Uncorrelated means there is no clear relationship between the two variables. Not applicable means the text does not suggest anything about the relationship between the two variables. 
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 8 relations:
Cognitive distraction -> Rumination
Forced-failure stress -> Sadness
Rumination -> Sadness
Forced-failure stress -> RSA withdrawal
Rumination Induction -> RSAwithdrawal
Induced distraction -> RSAwithdrawal
Forced-failure stress -> RSAwithdrawal
MDD -> Cardiovascular disease
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT



Input begins:
START TEXT
The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. Correlations are also observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma, all of which impact substance use patterns and disparities within these communities. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClassification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClassification would be inverse.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'not applicable', or 'uncorrelated'.
Direct means that an increase in one would cause a decrease in another, and inverse means that an increase in one would cause a decrease in another.
Uncorrelated means there is no clear relationship between the two variables. Not applicable means the text does not suggest anything about the relationship between the two variables. 
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 13 relations:
AI/AN status -> Substance-related mortality
AI/AN status -> Alcohol-related deaths
AI/AN status -> Chronic liver disease
AI/AN status -> Drug-related issues
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use initiation
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use rates
AI/AN adolescents -> Living on reservations
AI/AN adolescents -> Dropped out of school
AI/AN adults who drink -> Heavy, episodic drinking patterns
AI/AN communities -> Substance availability
AI/AN communities -> Trauma exposure
AI/AN communities -> Family and peer networks
AI/AN communities -> Historical trauma
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT



Input begins:
START TEXT
The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. Correlations are also observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma, all of which impact substance use patterns and disparities within these communities. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClassification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClassification would be inverse.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'not applicable', or 'uncorrelated'.
Direct means that an increase in one would cause a decrease in another, and inverse means that an increase in one would cause a decrease in another.
Uncorrelated means there is no clear relationship between the two variables. Not applicable means the text does not suggest anything about the relationship between the two variables. 
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 13 relations:
AI/AN status -> Substance-related mortality
AI/AN status -> Alcohol-related deaths
AI/AN status -> Chronic liver disease
AI/AN status -> Drug-related issues
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use initiation
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use rates
AI/AN adolescents -> Living on reservations
AI/AN adolescents -> Dropped out of school
AI/AN adults who drink -> Heavy, episodic drinking patterns
AI/AN communities -> Substance availability
AI/AN communities -> Trauma exposure
AI/AN communities -> Family and peer networks
AI/AN communities -> Historical trauma
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT



Input begins:
START TEXT
The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. Correlations are also observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma, all of which impact substance use patterns and disparities within these communities. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClassification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClassification would be inverse.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'not applicable', or 'uncorrelated'.
Direct means that an increase in one would cause a decrease in another, and inverse means that an increase in one would cause a decrease in another.
Uncorrelated means there is no clear relationship between the two variables. Not applicable means the text does not suggest anything about the relationship between the two variables. 
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 13 relations:
AI/AN status -> Substance-related mortality
AI/AN status -> Alcohol-related deaths
AI/AN status -> Chronic liver disease
AI/AN status -> Drug-related issues
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use initiation
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use rates
AI/AN adolescents -> Living on reservations
AI/AN adolescents -> Dropped out of school
AI/AN adults who drink -> Heavy, episodic drinking patterns
AI/AN communities -> Substance availability
AI/AN communities -> Trauma exposure
AI/AN communities -> Family and peer networks
AI/AN communities -> Historical trauma
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT



======================================================================
Paper Analyzed: test_paper
LLM Prompt:
START TEXT
The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. Correlations are also observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma, all of which impact substance use patterns and disparities within these communities. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClassification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClassification would be inverse.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'not applicable', or 'uncorrelated'.
Direct means that an increase in one would cause a decrease in another, and inverse means that an increase in one would cause a decrease in another.
Uncorrelated means there is no clear relationship between the two variables. Not applicable means the text does not suggest anything about the relationship between the two variables. 
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 13 relations:
AI/AN status -> Substance-related mortality
AI/AN status -> Alcohol-related deaths
AI/AN status -> Chronic liver disease
AI/AN status -> Drug-related issues
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use initiation
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use rates
AI/AN adolescents -> Living on reservations
AI/AN adolescents -> Dropped out of school
AI/AN adults who drink -> Heavy, episodic drinking patterns
AI/AN communities -> Substance availability
AI/AN communities -> Trauma exposure
AI/AN communities -> Family and peer networks
AI/AN communities -> Historical trauma
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT



======================================================================
Paper Analyzed: test_paper_2
LLM Prompt:
START TEXT
The review establishes several correlational relationships in the context of substance use and disorder among American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) populations in the United States. Notably, AI/AN status correlates with elevated rates of substance-related mortality, with alcohol-related deaths, chronic liver disease, and drug-related issues being notably higher. Additionally, AI/AN adolescents exhibit earlier initiation and higher rates of substance use, particularly among those living on reservations or who have dropped out of school, while AI/AN adults who drink tend to engage in heavy, episodic drinking patterns. However, surprisingly a negative correlation was observed between AI/AN communities and substance availability, trauma exposure, family and peer networks, and historical trauma. These correlational findings emphasize the multifaceted nature of substance use issues in AI/AN populations and highlight potential areas for targeted intervention and prevention efforts.
END TEXT

START PROMPT
Given the text validate a series of relationships between variables that will be included in a json format below.
For example, if the json includes a relation like "Country's per capita income -> Country's literacy rate", and the text includes "We find a strong correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClassification would be direct.
If instead the text includes ""We find a strong inverse correlation p < .0001 between a country's per capita income and it's literacy rate" then the RelationshipClassification would be inverse.
The SupportText field of your output should include verbaitum text related to the relation between the two variables without paraphrasing.
The Reasoning field should be used to step by step reason from the text of the paper to try to come up with a good relationship classification and should focus on plainly stated results over implications.
The RelationshipClassification field can only be 'direct', 'inverse', 'not applicable', or 'uncorrelated'.
Direct means that an increase in one would cause a decrease in another, and inverse means that an increase in one would cause a decrease in another.
Uncorrelated means there is no clear relationship between the two variables. Not applicable means the text does not suggest anything about the relationship between the two variables. 
Use exactly wording of outputs choices and input variable names, including capitalization choices. 

OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS START
The output should be formatted as a JSON instance that conforms to the JSON schema below.

As an example, for the schema {"properties": {"foo": {"title": "Foo", "description": "a list of strings", "type": "array", "items": {"type": "string"}}}, "required": ["foo"]}
the object {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]} is a well-formatted instance of the schema. The object {"properties": {"foo": ["bar", "baz"]}} is not well-formatted.

Here is the output schema:
```
{"properties": {"Relations": {"title": "Relations", "type": "array", "items": {"$ref": "#/definitions/SingleRelation"}}}, "required": ["Relations"], "definitions": {"SingleRelation": {"title": "SingleRelation", "type": "object", "properties": {"VariableOneName": {"title": "Variableonename", "type": "string"}, "VariableTwoName": {"title": "Variabletwoname", "type": "string"}, "SupportingText": {"title": "Supportingtext", "type": "string"}, "Reasoning": {"title": "Reasoning", "type": "string"}, "RelationshipClassification": {"title": "Relationshipclassification", "type": "string"}}, "required": ["VariableOneName", "VariableTwoName", "SupportingText", "Reasoning", "RelationshipClassification"]}}}
```
OUTPUT FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS END

Below is the list of relationships that you should include in your output. Ensure all relationships are evaluated!
Below are 12 relations:
AI/AN status -> Substance-related mortality
AI/AN status -> Alcohol-related deaths
AI/AN status -> Chronic liver disease
AI/AN status -> Drug-related issues
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use initiation
AI/AN adolescents -> Substance use rates
AI/AN adolescents -> Living on reservations
AI/AN adolescents -> Dropped out of school
AI/AN adults who drink -> Heavy, episodic drinking patterns
AI/AN communities -> Substance availability
AI/AN communities -> Trauma exposure
AI/AN communities -> Historical trauma
End of the list of relationships.

END PROMPT



